Hmm.
Hello, minister. Hello. Ah,
Perfect.
Right.
Alright. Good morning everybody.
Thank you Minister and all your team for being, uh, media.
Uh, we have you in here for 60 minutes.
Uh, the majority of the questions will be going
to opposition members.
Um, if officials are invited to speak, ask
that you please keep your remarks concise
and no need to paraphrase
what the minister has already said.
Um, I don't want too much rambling on.
We'll try and keep it focused
and concise until the point on
what the question is and address it.
Um, I like to give all members a chance, so, um, yeah,
please also indicate
and come through me when you have questions.
That way we can keep it orderly.
You may feel that may break it up a little bit
and what you're trying to achieve, but it's balance
between keep it orderly as well.
That's enough from me. Uh, minister, I'll hand over to you
for opening remarks and then we'll open to questions. Point
Of order. Mr. Speaker.
Point of order. Uh, sorry, Mr. Chair.
The scrutiny week hearing has been shortened from the 90
minute hearing the committee had
with the Minister of Health last year.
I've received a letter from the speaker about this,
in which you say it's, my expectation is
that ministers will make themselves unreservedly available
during scrutiny weeks to appear before committees.
The changes to standing orders
to improve financial scrutiny have been an important change
and a change agreed to
by all members in the standing orders.
So, I move that we have a 90
minute hearing with the minister.
Well, we, we have already agreed on a 60 minute meeting
with the minister, um, you
And your I move that we have a 90
minute hearing with the minister. Yeah, we
Absolutely support that. We
require more time and 60 minutes is not sufficient
Speaking. Mr. Members are
welcome to speak to that.
Um, Dr. Campbell, we have
Previously addressed this and actually voted on it
at a previous meeting.
Um, so we could go through those minutes to
Show that Cameron Luxton. Yeah. We've
Also, yeah, I was about to reiterate
what the co-chair has said
and also, you know, um, we've had time to prepare
for this meeting on 60 minutes being the basis
as the committee has previously voted on.
I think we should continue with that.
Any Marco, Mr. Chair, can I propose that, um,
that you take, uh, really good timings to ensure
that the opposition feel that they are able
to interrogate their questions, um, in, in a manner
that they feel satisfied if we do it within
60 minutes? Yeah. And, and that was
what I had indicated previously
as well, that I would be very clear.
And I, I also said that from the, that the motion,
the motion is that the meeting be extended from I
Move. We have a 90 minute hearing,
90 minute hearing. The
motion is that we have a 90 minute hearing,
although in favor say aye.
Aye. Those opposed say no, no motion was not carried.
Point of order, Mr. Chair. Point
Of order. A,
It's clear that the government members want a shorter time
with the minister in order to reduce our scrutiny time.
And I move that the full one hour of this hearing be
for questions solely from the opposition so
that the requirements of speakers ruling 1 4 1
slash one can be met.
That motion is moved. All those in favor say aye. Aye.
Aye. Those opposed say no, no, no.
Motion is not carried. Minister.
Oh, thank you. Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
And thank you for the opportunity to, um, appear
before the committee today to outline
how budget 2025 continues
to deliver on our government's commitment
to putting patients first and ensuring
that all New Zealanders have access
to timely quality healthcare.
Uh, I'm here with the, uh, director General of Health, uh,
Audrey Sonen, uh,
and the interim, uh, uh, CEO of Health New Zealand, uh,
Dr. Dale Bramley, uh,
and we have other officials here as well, uh, present
to answer questions.
Budget 2025 continues our commitment to invest in healthcare
with a record $7 billion increase in vote health operating
funding over the forecast period.
This includes an annual boost of $1.37 billion
to Health New Zealand's baseline,
bringing total health spending in 25 26
to $32.7 billion.
This investment is not just large in scale, it is focused
and deliberate targeting the outcomes
that matter most to patients.
It supports our clear health targets,
including shorter wait times for first vicious assessments
and elective treatments, shorter stays in emergency
departments, faster cancer treatment,
and improving childhood immunization rates.
Since becoming minister in January, been proud
to see early results that put patients first.
The last quarter alone, more than 48,000 elected procedures
and 160 7001st specialist assessments were completed.
Thousands of New Zealanders getting healthcare
that they need wait lists
for elective procedures have also started to drop.
Many fewer people are waiting for care
and more patients are being seen.
This marks a meaningful step towards a patient
focused health system.
There is more work to do, which is why we are delivering the
elective boost, which between, uh, February
and May, is delivered over 9,500 additional elective
procedures with the majority being
for patients who've been waiting longer than four months.
Progress is also being made on first special assessments
with 102%
of planned volumes being delivered in the year to March, 2025.
We're also seeing encouraging signs across our other health
targets, which were removed under the previous government.
People are spending less time in emergency departments,
child and immunization rates are improving,
and cancer patients are receiving their
first treatments more quickly.
That means more New Zealanders getting the care they need
when they need it, which is key to putting patients first.
Budget 2025 builds on this progress, uh,
with a significant uplift in funding for Health New Zealand
to fund more planned care treatments such as knee, hip,
cataract operations, additional cancer treatments,
inpatient admissions, uh,
and more investment into primary care as well
to take pressure off hospitals
and ensure people can get the care they need closer to home.
Budget 2025 also invests in our future.
Over $1 billion in capital funding will go towards upgrading
hospitals and facilities so that they're fit for purpose,
safe, modern, and are able to meet the health needs
of growing and aging population.
We're also strengthening our GP clinics
and health workforce with targeted initiatives,
including a hundred clinical placements
for overseas trained doctors.
Recruitment incentives for up
to 400 graduate nurses annually for five years.
A hundred additional doctor training places at our medical
schools over the course of this government
to 120 training places
for nurse practitioners and GP clinics.
And a $285 million funding boost
for GP clinics over the next three years.
We know that a strong primary care system is essential
to getting a health back on track,
and this budget makes it clear that we are committed to
that goal, but we're under no illusions.
There is a lot of work to do
and we are focused on addressing it. Thank
You, minister. Point of order.
Dr.
Uh, the, um, we're well passed.
The three minutes for the minister's remarks.
We're about not too far over. Okay, good.
See who's wrapping up. Um,
I assume you'll have a question as well.
I, Dr. Thank, so I'll give you that honor going first.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Minister,
what is the last estimate you have
of Health New Zealand's deficit?
Uh, the advice I've received as they're on track
to deliver on the $1.1 billion deficit, uh, which is
what was projected, and they're on track to deliver
that in this financial year.
How, uh, how much savings will be required in the coming
financial year to meet the target
of a $200 million deficit for Health New Zealand?
Well, the advice I've received is
that Health New Zealand is making substantial progress.
What's the number? And, uh,
health New Zealand is making substantial progress on a month
by month basis to reduce its deficit PO position.
How much is gonna have to be cut?
Uh, look, what will be delivered is a significant
$1.37 billion investment in this budget,
operational investment into Health New
Zealand's baseline to support. It could be
Do by the scale of cuts.
I'll ask that you Please don't.
Well, well, if a simple piece
of information like Health New Zealand's, uh, cuts for the,
for the financial year that we are discussing this well, we
Are focused on delivering within the budget.
The budget is a $1.37 billion uplift.
And thanks to the work that Health New Zealand has done
With a secret amount of cuts,
Look, I'm happy to, I'm happy to answer your questions.
The, the, the reality is there is a
$1.37 billion uplift and
How much Cut in the investment
going into Health New Zealand.
And that is additional funding for, uh, frontline services,
both across hospital and specialist services,
and also across primary and community care.
The reality is the month by month, uh, say, uh, month
by month financial position is improving significantly.
Meaning that that uplift will go
towards investment in frontline services
and frontline delivery.
Because of the work that the commissioners have done the
month by month run rate in terms of its debt, the deficit,
the deficit position has improved to such a point. This
Is a lot of that Investment
And you are hiding the amount,
amount vestment, that investment,
That investment will be fully going
into frontline services.
Mr. Uh, chair documentary question.
Uh, there is a statutory requirement for a health plan
to be presented that costs the activities that are underway.
Why is that health plan not part of this hearing?
Uh, well, the last government passed, um,
the Piora Healthy Futures Act,
which was more focused on strategies than surgeries.
Uh, and the reality is it was constantly looking at
how many planning documents you could write rather than
actually how much you could deliver.
My focus as Minister of Health is actually on getting people
the healthcare that they need.
Now, the, uh, what
Seems to be on hiding financial
information No. From Parliament?
No, it's about focusing on delivery.
That's why we put back the health targets.
That's why we released the health target data yesterday,
which clearly shows that improvements are being made.
My focus is on delivery for patients hiding
What's happening with and deliver dollars of public money
And delivering. There
will be, uh, each year, health New Zealand provides,
uh, financial reports as part of its annual report.
It does that each and every year. Uh, that
Supplementary question, And the answer
to your question is that the last government's reforms were
focused on strategies, not surgery,
find focused on delivery.
And the accountability mechanisms are very clear.
Carlos Chong, I think the the answer should be, uh,
you know, there should be here in silence.
I I mean, we, we can keep doing an argument during,
during the minister giving the answer.
'cause I can't hear the answer at all. It's
Not necessarily a point of order,
but Yeah, I, I do hear your, your point
and I have asked that we allow the minister to speak.
Um, I share one more, one more expect
Share that questions answered.
I mean, there were, there were five questions about
cuts that wasn't addressed.
This is, is a simple question that wasn't addressed.
There's going to be a point
where members will seek an actual answer
to the questions that are asked.
Yeah, I understand that. Look.
But if we can keep it coming
through the chair, that helps to keep it all.
I think the issue is that you've got people shouting over
each other and everyone to hear what is being said. Okay.
Supplementary Dr.
Question, a third or so of your letter of expectations
to Health New Zealand is redacted.
What are you hiding?
Well, there's work underway in relation to, uh,
next year's, um, delivery.
Uh, one of those issues, one of those areas is around
the work that's underway around electives
for the next financial year.
Uh, and Health New Zealand will be announcing those plans
once those are confirmed.
But we are very focused on delivery.
That's what I'm focused on, is getting people, the,
the treatments and the delivery that is required
to be done. Well,
That letter sets out and we're very focused
how almost $30 billion of taxpayers money is to be spent.
Well, the government policy and
the public can't see it. Well,
The government policy statement,
the government policy statement on health outlines the
government's expectations on what, uh,
health New Zealand should be delivering on
that document is publicly available
and outlines our priorities as government,
which includes the five health targets which
your government removed.
And by the way, every single one
of them went backwards over your six years in government.
So you, I would suggest looking in the mirror
and looking back at the, the, the wait lists,
the ballooning wait list that we inherited, the problems
that we are now focused on fixing,
and the system that I'm focused on making sure it
delivers for patients.
If you look at first special assessments, the number
of people waiting more than four months increased
by 6400% over your six years in government. When you
Number people waiting lives in a pandemic
lecture me about patients.
Well, the number of people waiting more than four months
for an over an elective treatment increased by two
and a half thousand percent under your government.
We have a wait list. We have, we have challenges,
and we are focused on delivering for patients.
Okay, I'm gonna move over here.
No, I've got a supple, I've
got us up on this line of questioning. You
Have a supplementary and then I'll
come to our client as well.
You have a sub, you have a primary?
Yes, I have and I've got primary. I need you. Absolutely.
Yeah. Well keep doing it Loud Primary, my sub, sub primary,
My sub to the minister.
Um, noting the references to strategy is, um, I want
to understand what payor means to the minister.
Can you explain what Paya means?
Well, the Paya Act means healthy futures
for New Zealand is, and we are making sure
that we are delivering on that
through our five health targets.
Paya means a bit more than that.
If you know Tar Mason jury
and you've read the act now, if we can look to
what Paya means for thriving healthy individuals, whanau,
and community, how do you believe that your budget's going
to deliver on these things
that Paya has promised New Zealanders?
Uh, because we have five health targets,
which are focused on delivery for patients.
And as I said earlier, the last government removed the
health targets and every single one of them went backwards.
And I think about the immunization target,
which went back significantly.
And the impact that that has had on our,
on our Maori children
and Tamari, uh, that is an abject failure
of the previous government.
And I'm proud to see that the numbers are starting
to trend back up in the right direction
because we've put the target back in place.
We are holding primary healthcare organizations accountable,
uh, and we are focusing back on what really matters.
So that is where we are seeing delivery
and my role as Minister of Health
and the funding that this budget puts into healthcare is
to continue that focus for all New Zealanders. So
The minister I'm ish.
It's an ongoing sustain, I'm going
to Hamish yet, and I'll ask.
That sucks actually. Be sucks on the primary.
This is now a question around
Excellent. Um, thank, thank
you, minister.
You've been have been talking about ballooning wait lists
and we've been talking about, uh,
healthcare allowing people to thrive.
Um, and I think you said the elective, the wait time
for elective surgeries increase over at 2000%.
Was this why elective Boost was necessary?
Look, absolutely. Why Elective Boost was necessary
because actually people are waiting too
long for those treatments.
Hips, knees, cataract, operations.
People are waiting too long. It's unacceptable.
And I make no apology for utilizing the private sector
and outsourcing a large number of procedures
and surgeries to the private sector in order
to get things done.
Uh, and so that's why the elective
boost has been put in place.
It's about saying we need to maximize
what is delivered both in the public system
and in the private system, so that patients can get the care
that they need in a timely manner.
And that's what we, we we're delivering on.
And Health New Zealand is very focused,
and we're gonna continue to continue
that focus into the next financial year.
Thank you. Jim Cameron, uh, this primary is actually on,
uh, elective boost.
You talked about some of the, um, the increased procedures
that I heard in your initial comments.
I think I heard nine and a half thousand.
How does that track against what you're expecting, uh,
to get off the waiting list?
Uh, well, we are targeting 10
and a half thousand by the end of June.
Mm-hmm. Uh, the numbers that we have, uh, I think are
to the 18th of May for the nine and a half thousand.
That's right. Um, so we are well on track
to deliver against that target.
Uh, but my focus has been very clear that, um,
to Health New Zealand, uh, well, that target is just, uh,
the target is to be,
my expectation is they should be well outperforming their
target and delivering as much as possible.
But look, I mean, the, the, the, the, the, the, the,
what we're doing here is not something new.
Outsourcing has been part of how elective treatments,
hip knees, cataract operations have been delivered
for some time, uh, by the health system.
What we're doing is we are putting a step change in place
to really get on top of those wait lists.
Uh, the majority of those surgeries have been
to people waiting more than four months for those surgeries.
Uh, and so we're just bringing a real
focus to getting things done. So that
Supplementary, Uh, supplementary supplementary.
So yeah. Uh, okay. Two subs there.
But, um, the, that, that four months waiting list that you
referenced, actually, what is that meaning for people
who are getting these elective, uh,
boost surgeries through this program?
What, how much are New Zealanders who have been waiting
for such a long time for surgery, how much are they, uh,
what's the decrease in waiting time for the,
for the individuals that
are actually getting these surgeries?
Uh, well, I guess I think it's around 60% or
or more have been for people waiting more than four months.
Right. Um, and so for people who have been waiting,
you know, a long time for say a hip, a hip surgery
or a knee surgery, uh,
they've been waiting in a lot of 'em in pain.
Um, and so being able to, uh, speed up the delivery
and get them that treatment that they need, uh,
makes a significant difference in each one,
every one individual's life.
And I actually make no apology for that fact
that we are using the private sector to deliver that.
I make no apology for that. Mm-hmm.
Uh, we are focused on delivery.
And for those patients who are receiving that treatment, uh,
they, they do not care who's delivering it.
They want it done, and we're focused on doing it
Of course. And final
stuff on that Mr. Chair.
Um, is there any other areas, I mean,
this has been a success using the private, um,
the efficient private sector
to actually deliver some extra surgeries.
Is there any other areas that you're looking at
that we could utilize? What the
Look, my expectation, my expectation
of Health New Zealand is that they, um, utilize
and maximize delivery across both the public
and private system to deliver within their budget the, uh,
the treatments, uh,
that New Zealanders expect in relation to our health targets.
And so, look, there will always be other areas,
but if you look at the health system,
there are many public
private partnerships in our health system.
Primary practice is a public private partnership, aged care
as a public private partnership.
So we are simply just delivering
what is actually standard practice across a significant
portion of our health system
with a very clear focus on patients and delivery.
Okay. We've got SARS from Asha and HOA
In April. April Treasury
noted that the elective surgery target is
being gained with the prioritization of people
who haven't been waiting long over those who have,
is it fair to make people who have been waiting longer
continue to wait so that your target improves?
Uh, no. We are focused on longer waiters
with our elective boost.
That is the expectation,
and that is the results of the numbers.
The elective boost is focused on long waiters
because actually it is important that people get seen.
The target is about ensuring people get seen within four
months, and the elective boost is being focused on those
long waiters so that they are able
to get their treatments seen in a timely manner.
And so we make no apology for our elective boost, uh, policy
and what we're doing utilizing the private sector
and the focus is on long waiters.
Treasury is saying you've created a system of incentives
where people are prioritizing short waiters in
order to meet your targets.
Yeah. Well, the numbers don't, is that fair?
But Treasury, treasury,
Well, treasury says all sorts of things.
My point here is the facts.
The facts are the majority of the people receiving treatment
through elective boost have been,
are people waiting over four months?
That's the focus.
Is it also a fact that in the last, uh,
that since mid 2023, we are 95% are aware, 62%
of people were receiving their elective
treatments within four months.
This is now down to 57.3%.
Uh, well, the targets, that is the,
the data was released yesterday,
but that is why we put in place elective boost.
Uh, that, that data point was to the end of March.
Elective boost started in the middle of, uh,
or around that period of time.
I think it was late February.
Uh, it is really, uh, the majority
of the elective boost treatments have been in April and May.
So following, uh, that data point,
and the focus has been on long waiters, I'm happy for,
um, Dale to speak to that.
So to the, uh, question about long waiters,
that has absolutely been the focus in the request
to all the regions to focus on long workers.
Dr. Bramley has the proportion of short waiters
who are getting treatment increased over the proportion
of long wait relative to the proportion of long waiters.
That's, that's what's got, that's
what treasury has described
The focus for the elective boost
has absolutely been on long waiters. Can
You answer my question please, Dr. Brandley?
It is a higher proportion
of long waiters in the elective boost
for sure. Over, so the elective boost
Has been the elective boost over in terms
of people getting surgery.
Now, uh, has the proportion of people who have been,
uh, waiting for less than four months gone up in terms
of who is getting treatment?
I, I look forward to you celebrating our Q4 data on
the, uh, elective treatment.
Well be. Good. Point four hasn't actually finished yet.
Yeah. On this, on the elective, I wanted
to unpack the cost effectness of engaging private providers,
um, in this space, knowing that, you know,
we've got private providers with a built-in, uh,
benefit back to their shareholders,
and yet the public system doesn't.
Now we're now locking in 10 year contracts
with these providers to deliver these surgeries.
Isn't that going to cost more in the long run?
Well, I've asked Health New Zealand to work
with our private hospitals to engage
around longer term contracts to ensure cost efficiency.
The approach in the past has been more an ad hoc basis,
which has driven up higher cost
for elective surgeries, which are outsourced.
But as I said earlier, outsourcing, his outsourcing
elective treatments has, is not a new thing.
In fact, um, uh, the honor, right, honorable Chris Ens,
when he was the Minister of Health back in 2020, uh,
took a paper to cabinet at the time saying, we need
to make greater use of the private sector, uh,
and we need to work with the New Zealand Private Surgical
Hospitals Association to deliver contract,
You term they As well.
This is not something which, um, is new.
Uh, it is something we want
to make sure we are delivering, maximizing
Delivery, telling you not to do
this. It's not just about,
Well, we need to maximize delivery against both the public
system and the private system.
And part of the electric boost,
Actually back on the health profession
Part, part of the public part
of the elective boost is actually investing more into
Burwood Hospital and into Tora Hodo in Auckland to ensure
that we are delivering more through the dedicated
elective treatment hospital services
that Health New Zealand also operates, so
that patients can be seen in a timely and quality manner.
Okay. We've got a suck from Thank, thank you.
Thank you. Minister. What effect, by taking some
of the pressure off by using some of our facilities
around the country that may be private.
What effect does that have on our public system
when they need to do some other stuff?
Well, the issue here is that maximizes
what can be delivered against the public and private system.
There are some parts of the country where actually, uh,
we are really challenged around delivery
of those elective treatments in the public system.
Give you the example of Nelson,
which does have a bed shortage.
That's why we're actually investing in the upgrade
of the hospital in Nelson.
Uh, and the,
and when the hospital's full, the elective wait lists
and the elective lists get canceled.
And so by outsourcing those lists to private hospitals, uh,
we're able to get those patients seen
and get those treatments delivered.
Another example is when we do hit the winter months
and the hospitals get busy with, uh, winter illnesses, uh,
elective wait lists and elective lists often get canceled
to prioritize acute care.
And so by focusing on, uh, outsourcing
and utilizing the public
and private systems, we can ensure that we continue
to deliver for patients.
And I make no apology, as I've said multiple times,
make no apology about putting patients at the center of
what we're trying to achieve.
Carlos, you hit a Yes, I've got you on the loss.
So we talking about course and benefit.
Does, does ministry
or Mr, do you guys have any, um,
data on the overall economic benefit?
Will people recover faster and back to the workforce faster?
Well, ultimately, um, when we know
that if people are waiting on a wait list, uh,
if they're in pain or they're unable to work, um, that,
that naturally means they're not, um, necessarily, you know,
contributing as, as,
as much in their employment or in their employment.
And so ultimately by getting people seen sooner,
they're able to contribute more, whether that's
to the economy, through employment
or socially through, uh, through, uh,
whatever else they may wish to do.
So, um, reducing wait list has multiple benefits,
and I just say, again, my focus is on patients,
putting patients first
and delivery for them in a timely quality manner. Thank
You. Excellent. Okay.
We've got, um, a series of primaries.
I'll just so everyone knows, we've got Isha
and Ana, Kieran, Carlos, you can got mine. Thank you.
Did put my hand up earlier. Jamie. Hi.
Vel, one in six New Zealanders cannot access general
practice care because of cost.
What will you do to bring that number down?
Uh, look, I think, um,
you know, it's a, it's a good question.
Uh, and there's a significant investment into primary care,
uh, in this budget, including both workforce and health.
New Zealand is also allocating, uh, a significant uplift
to primary care to support greater access.
Um, there's a number and, and, and, and,
and that those negotiations, uh,
through the PSAP negotiations with the, uh,
p hos is currently underway.
Uh, and that will, um,
I think more clearly answer your question
once those are concluded.
But ultimately those are confidential negotiations, uh,
which are currently underway.
Uh, in terms of, um, access, uh, I agree, uh, access
to primary care is credibly important.
Uh, and that's where the, the increased investment, um,
is focused so that we can ensure that our, our,
our primary care providers are financially sustainable.
Uh, but they're also supported around workforce.
And that's where all of those initiatives in the budget are
focused, whether it's the a hundred overseas doctor training
positions, the nurse practitioner training positions, um,
the increased funding for nurses
who start their careers in primary care.
Uh, those are all about making sure
that we're focusing on increasing the resourcing available
to primary care, but also a real focus on, uh, on workforce,
which is critically important in primary care.
Can you commit to the cost of seeing a doctor coming down?
Uh, look, those negotiation, those negotiations are
underway, uh, through the, through the PSAP negotiations
and obviously that they're confidential.
Um, my focus is on making sure
that primary care is financially sustainable, uh, so
that is able to deliver more for patients, um,
and is able to take pressure off the hospital system.
Uh, and so those are the, uh,
those negotiations are currently being worked through.
Uh, but as, as you, as you know, um, there's also a number
of, um, areas where the government invests
to target investment towards those who do need support
to access primary care, whether that's the under fourteens,
uh, being able to be seen for free.
Uh, it's the very low cost access scheme.
Uh, there's the community services card.
There's a range of initiatives the government continues
to support, uh, to ensure that we can target investment
for primary care to those who do need it the most.
In January, health New Zealand put a moratorium on new
primary health organizations
until policy decisions on the hos were taken.
But five months later, a new PHO was allowed. Why
Our Health New Zealand, um, lifted
that moratorium is my understanding, uh,
and, uh, allowed the, uh,
and is allowing applications to come forward.
Look, there is continuing work around, um, around PS
and this ministry, ministry of Health as leading that work
and providing that advice, uh, to me
as the Minister of Health.
Uh, but at the same time, uh, look, there's the,
there's a process that, uh, people want to go through
to apply, uh,
and that process is, is open for people who wish
to put forward those applications.
The moratorium was put in place
because that policy work was underway by your government.
And then it appears that it's still continuing,
and yet one PHO is allowed to be approved.
Did that PHO receive special treatment?
Look, the, the, the mor my, my, my, my understanding,
the advice I've received is that there was, uh, a moratorium
that moratorium was lifted.
Um, ultimately there is policy advice.
I think the, you know, that policy advice will come,
decisions we made in due course.
Uh, and in the meantime,
applications are able to be brought forward.
We've got a couple of supplementaries please.
One here, and then I'll go to Ham
Two. If you wouldn't mind this
chair. Well, you've had
Three. I'll go to
Hamish after this one. Will,
Will this PHO that is closely linked to a corporation
be not-for-profit.
And how will it be accountable to the community?
Uh, well, my understanding is all primary health
organizations are required to be charitable trusts.
How much so, um,
Emily, you mentioned that bit in one
of your previous answers about workforce force
being, being an issue.
What is the government doing to strengthen, uh,
the workforce in primary healthcare?
Uh, look, there's a number of things we're doing to, uh,
support, uh, the workforce in primary care, um,
as outlined in the budget, um, we have a significant, uh,
investment into a range of primary care actions.
Uh, in the primary care tactical plan.
Uh, we've increased, uh, the number
of doctor training places in our medical schools.
We're providing, uh, up
to a hundred internationally trained doctors the opportunity
to be able to train in primary care, supporting up
to 50 domestic graduate doctors into primary care,
incentivizing primary care to recruit
and support up to 400 graduate nurses annually
for five years, approved access to advanced education for up
to 120 primary care nurses delivering up
to 120 training places
for nurse practitioners specializing in primary care.
So there's a range of initiatives that we have underway
to support the workforce in primary care.
But I said earlier, it's also that additional investment,
uh, which Health New Zealand will be making, um, to ensure
that primary care is well funded, uh, so that it is able to
continue to, uh, be more accessible to patients,
which is critically important.
Jenny, for a SEC Supplement. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, in terms of the international medical graduates, yeah.
Um, are they tending to go into the regions
or into the urban areas?
And if they do go into the regions, what kind
of support is they're available for them?
And is it, is it, is there effectiveness being modeled?
Yeah, so that, that's a really good question.
Um, two points on that.
Firstly, uh, yes, the regions will be part of that.
In fact, there was a trial last year.
Waikato was the first region which trialed it.
Uh, and the support around that is a really important part
of what Health New Zealand's delivering.
We've had a number of conversations with Health New Zealand
and also the New Zealand recs, NZ Recs doctors.
Uh, we've had some workshops with them
to actually talk about that particular issue
because that is an issue that I've raised
around the support that's required.
Um, and it's an area that I've asked Health New Zealand
to continue to focus on so
that they are well supported through that training process.
Thank you. Thank you. I'll go for her primary. Thank you.
Um, minister, you said on the weekend, uh,
that you are repealing the health charter
and sector principles to reduce red tape
and make things clearer for everyone.
I just wanna refer to the health sector principles
that talk about equity, uh, equitable levels of service, um,
equitable health, health outcomes, um,
that the health sector should provide a choice
of quality services and developing
and maintaining a health workforce.
How is this not clear?
Why are we repealing this very key part of the
Legislation? Well, reality is the,
the New Zealand Health Charter,
which was put in place under the previous government,
doesn't mention the word patient once,
doesn't mention the word patient once it mentions unions 11
times doesn't mention patients once.
My focus is very clear, putting patients first, delivering
for patients.
And so if you look at those health sector principles, um,
you know, one of them is requiring the health system to, um,
to deliver against, like climate change obligations.
We have a ministry for the environment for that.
I want surgeries, not strategies I've been very clear about.
My focus is on patients reducing wait lists,
the five health targets.
And we need to unclutter the system so
that the system can deliver more for patients.
And that's why we are making those changes in legislation,
which will certainly come before the select committee.
Minister, what do you say to those in public health
and population health that argue that we need
to have targeted approaches across those populations most
impacted, what
Do you say? I,
and, and we've been very clear as a government
where there is a need, we will invest.
And that's where, you know, last week I announced the
extension of the immunization immunizing our TAMARI
initiative, which is an initiative very much focused on
immunizing Maori children,
because that is an area where there is a significant need.
And so the health targets are about highlighting the need,
uh, and highlighting where the focus needs to be
and where there is a need to invest to address, uh,
population inequities.
Uh, health New Zealand will deliver on
that based on the need
The health sector principles.
Minister reflect the recommendations
of the Yi Tribunal on Y 2 5 7 5.
Are you turning your back on the recommendations
of the Waitangi Tribunal By repealing
and removing the health sector principles?
I'm focusing on patients,
and as I said, the delivery of that is simply being
A document au patients are Communicated.
It's a document which doesn't even refer to patients,
is not the word patient, doesn't even feature once in
the document that was produced.
And so I'm putting patients first focusing on outcomes.
We have five health targets,
and we wanna make sure we're improving out health outcomes
for both Maori and non Maori for all New Zealanders
through the delivery of the services
that Health New Zealand provides.
Okay, so let's unpack that.
You've referred to improving services for Maori,
you are relegating Iwi Maori partnership boards.
Now to what community? Uh, whanau voice.
What happens to the plans
that have been commissioned and developed locally?
You are elevating the, the HAC,
the Ho Maori Advisory Committee above
and beyond the Iwi Maori partnership boards. Why?
Well, we wanna make sure that the advice
that the Iwi Maori partnership boards flows through
to the HOA Maori advisory Committee.
Uh, and that that advice can then be
provided to the minister or, and
or the, uh, health New Zealand board
to consider the, the advice.
So it's about actually enhancing the role of HA,
streamlining the advice that is brought forward
and ensuring that those voices are, are clearly, uh,
able to be represented.
But at the end of the day, we want
to improve health outcomes for all New Zealanders.
We have five health targets, which are incredibly clear,
and our focus is on delivering against them. And
So the Iwi Maori partner come
through the chair, please, Mr.
Chair. And then we've go Iwi Maori partnership boards are
seeing their power stripped back.
They will no longer have a strategic commissioning function.
Are they going to be monitoring the system anymore?
Are they just community au voice place? They'll
Providing place provid, they'll be providing their vo the,
the views and the areas which need to be focused on
and providing that advice up through the advisory committee.
That legislation will shortly be before the house,
and this committee will have the opportunity to consider it.
And enclos Dr. Ve, um, in, in closing, um,
the HA Maori advisory committee,
there is no information on this group online,
the Public Health Advisory Committee.
You can see their work plans, you can see their minutes,
you can see their board packs.
What is the terms of reference
for the ha Maori advisory committee,
and when will we be able to see
what they're actually doing tangibly
to improve Maori health outcomes? Yeah.
And they've provided a number of reports,
which I believe are available online,
and we're happy to can see them back to come back to happy
to provide information you're, uh, come back
to you on that. Okay.
Majority us up. Thank you.
Uh, the majority of this budget is cost pressure, uh,
increases for hospital and specialist services.
It's a 6% change.
For primary care, it's 6.5% change,
but for Maori, it's only 2% do.
How do you justify that? Is inflation less for Maori?
The budget invests for all New Zealanders.
Every single dollar is going
to go towards investing in health services, which deliver
for all New Zealanders.
And so when it comes to hospital
and specialist services, they deliver services
for all New Zealanders when it comes
to primary care deliver, they deliver
for all New Zealanders.
My focus is on delivering health
services for all New Zealanders.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, minister.
Um, and of course one of the, one
of the challenges in the healthcare system,
which potentially could lead to disparities
of health is access to primary healthcare.
How do you see, how do you see things like telehealth, um,
helping to bridge some of that gap?
Well, that is one of the areas that we are investing in,
in this budget, is around providing, uh, new Zealanders
with the opportunity to be able to access, uh,
online digital, um, uh, GP appointments, um,
through a new 24 7, um, initiative, uh,
which will be launched shortly.
Uh, and that will provide another option, another choice
for New Zealanders to be able to access, uh, primary care.
Uh, ultimately, um, the, the, the primary carer, uh, will,
will remain with the general practitioner that a member, uh,
a patient is registered with.
They'll be, remain the primary carer,
but this will become another option, another choice.
Um, you know, I think, you know, there's some parts
of the country where, where there's long areas to travel
or where there are dis uh, current disparities.
Uh, this provides another option, another alternative choice
for patients to be able to access the care that they need.
Han Minister, uh, you've spoken to, um,
ha Maori outcomes,
and we've heard that there's been a minuscule, uh, increase
of Hara Maori funding.
We've got a seven to eight year age, uh,
gap ex in life expectancy between Maori and non Maori.
So wanting to understand what you have funded
as a specific initiative that will have a measured impact on
that Maori non Maori life expected to get.
Well, there's a range of initiatives in this budget,
which will, uh, focus on all New Zealanders
and ensure that we are improving health
outcomes for all New Zealanders.
And when I look across, uh,
whether it's elective treatments,
whether it's faster cancer treatments,
whether it's shorter stays in emergency departments,
or the investment in primary care,
those investments are focused on delivering
for all New Zealanders.
And the health target data, uh, that is, uh, being released,
uh, is also being released, uh, with a focus on how, uh,
Maori or Pacific communities are also, uh, accessing, uh,
and being measured against those health targets.
Because actually it's important that we do provide that data
and we do measure the, uh, the data as to
how it is impacting on different communities
to ensure the health system is delivering.
Uh, for all New Zealanders
Maori DA seven to eight years earlier than non Maori,
what is a specific initiative that you are funding
that will close those gaps?
Well, I'd say one of the key things we're doing is
investing significant uplift in this budget
on new cancer medicines.
And that is gonna make a huge difference for New Zealanders.
Uh, that is a record investment in cancer medicines, uh,
which is funded, I think, uh, over 20 new cancer medicines.
Uh, and, and, and, and, you know, a significant number
of other treatments, uh, which will make a big difference
for many, many New Zealanders. Oh
Yeah. Stop. Okay.
Uh, your government has made a big initiative
around cancer medicines.
Why on earth aren't you measuring cancer survival if you're
so concerned about outcomes?
Well, we met, there's a, a large number of measurements
that we do to ensure that we are focused on whether
You live or die is a pretty important one, isn't it?
Uh, we're focused $600 million
or public spending, and you're not measuring that.
Well, we're focused on making sure we improve Kiwi's
access to medicines.
Uh, something your government left a massive fiscal hole
that we had to fix in budget 2024.
So again, I suggest you looked in the mirror
Doesn't really care about us. I
Suggest No, you look, if you wanna talk about medicines,
you don't care about medicines
because you left a fiscal hole of hundreds of millions
of dollars in budget.
2024. Yeah, you guys, we had to fix, we had
to fix. Got, I've gone.
Karen Malty you primary. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Primary thank you, minister.
This morning you put on social media that you were committed
to being transparent
and accountable, yet you have refused
to answer simple questions around what has happened
to the up to $90 million settlement between a health NZ
and the Master and District Council money earmarked solely
for the WA upper hospital to the extent
that the Ombudsman is now investigating.
So, can you please tell me if any of
that settlement money has been spent on a purpose
other than Adapa Hospital?
Well, as I've said to you on multiple occasions, uh,
there was a confidential, uh, settlement.
I'm not aware of the details of that settlement.
Um, and ultimately
That's good 'cause I'm not asking about the settlement,
I'm asking about expenditure,
which is what this hearing is about.
I'm not asking you how much the settlement was.
I accept that's confidential,
and in fact, I haven't asked you that once.
What I'm asking you is, has any of
that settlement been spent
for any other purpose other
than Adapa Hospital you're making?
It's something you are accountable for.
Are you're making an assumption around, uh, the question
of financial settlement?
I have not been briefed on the settlement.
Settlement is confidential.
Uh, and what I would say in regards
to wided up a hospital is it has been highlighted
in the health infrastructure.
Uh, plan is an area that requires investment,
and it is an area which I'm focused on ensuring It does
receive investment in its infrastructure.
It has received its, uh, some, some investment into, uh,
into sort of earthquake strengthening, which
Was before the, Uh, and there,
and there will be continued investment.
I understand there are business cases underway, uh,
on increased MRI capacity.
Uh, there is a business case underway, I believe, in terms
of endoscopy, uh, services.
Uh, and so there is, uh, certainly work underway
to ensure, continue to invest
That to all the money from that settlement used up
Hospital. Well, I can commit to
the, I can say
that there will continue to be investment
in wided up a hospital that is critically important
to the people of Wided upper
and critically important to this government that we do focus
and invest and wided up a hospital.
It's been identified in the health infrastructure plan.
There are business cases underway.
Uh, we're very focused on that.
Isn't it actually the case that you've taken
that settlement and used it for other purposes, given
that Health New Zealand claim during the court process
that an entire new hospital is required, such, uh,
the deficiencies in that hospital, the claim was for up
to $90 million.
You initially tried to use the excuse
that it was confidential, even though the questions were
about expenditure, then you've come back
with a ludicrous claim that it's not in the public interest.
This can be cleared up straight away by you saying yes,
I'm not gonna tell you what the settlement is,
which is fine, but all of it will be spent on ada.
Well, I Don't know. And
you've refused to do that. Well,
No, I don't, I don't know what the settlement was.
It was co It's confidential. I'm asked you about that.
Well, you said, well, you're,
and I said you're making an assumption,
but I, about my knowledge,
and I don't have knowledge of the settlement rubbish,
but what I am committed
to is the whited upper hospital requires investment.
It's identified in the health infrastructure plan.
There are some business cases underway.
Uh, and that will outline future
investment that is required.
Can you rule out last question, Mr. Chair? That's fine.
That's fine. Can you rule out any of
that settlement being used for other purposes?
Well, again, I make the same point.
You were making assumptions about settlement.
There has been a settlement. There has been
A settlement. A fact. That's
a fact. You're making,
you're making a question, you're making an assumption around
what the settlement is.
I have no knowledge of the settlement. It
Has been used for elsewhere.
But I can has, and you're not being upfront
About it. I'm not, I
I can say this.
That investment is required in the wired upper hospital.
It is a priority outlined in the health infrastructure plan.
There are business cases underway, uh, on a range of areas
of which require investment.
Uh, and that will then, uh, allocate, uh,
make future decisions around allocation of funding.
What we dunno is what you've done with our money. Amish.
Excellent. Tha thank you Minister.
There's been a billion dollars, um, allocated
to health infrastructure that's gonna benefit communities,
hospitals right across the country.
Could you tell us about the new modular units
that you've recently announced?
Yeah, look, this is, um, part
of the budget 2025 infrastructure allocation.
And the, the, the outcome here is to invest in rapid
increase in bed capacity where there are priorities.
Um, two areas which have been identified so far.
One is Nelson. There's a need to, uh,
focus on bed capacity there.
Uh, and that we have identified that hospital is requiring
that modular builds
enable faster development than building
a full scale, uh, hospital.
Uh, so it allows us to have that bed capacity sooner
to provide those services.
That's the intention in Nelson.
Uh, we've also allocated funding for the, uh, new hospital,
uh, rebuild there, which will increase bed numbers.
And so this is an interim measure to support that hospital
to be able to continue to deliver the care that's required,
uh, and increase the care that's required in Nelson, uh,
whilst that build is underway. Excellent.
So, so Just gotta stop.
Excellent. Um, and you talk,
talk about the Nelson Hospital.
Um, what steps has the government taken
to ensure major redevelopments have stalled such as
as Nelson are, uh, delivered?
Look, I think it's really important that we focus,
um, on delivery.
And I think the challenge we've had across the health state
in recent years is there's been, um, a number
of projects which, um, have haven't, uh, got
to the delivery stage as quickly as they need to.
My focus on getting those projects
delivered, uh, that's my focus.
Um, and so the Ho Nelson Hospital rebuild is, uh, is one
of those which we've allocated the funding for, uh,
and the expectation
for Health New Zealanders to get on with delivery.
The interim big capacity though is to ensure
that there is increased capacity sooner.
'cause there are real challenges at that hospital now.
Uh, and we need to address those,
and that's why it's been identified
for that, for that investment.
Uh, but look, I'd also just point to the legislation changes
that we did announce on the weekend.
Um, currently health infrastructure is not one of the areas,
uh, that health, the health health
center is required to focus on.
And so we're, we're requiring health infrastructure, uh,
and we're gonna be putting that into the legislation
as an area which actually does require, uh,
further attention and putting in place a health
infrastructure committee with experts who can help ensure
that health infrastructure projects across the country
are able to be delivered on time and with budget.
Dr. Oh point of order, Mr.
Chair, I, I do want to make sure I get to my set
of primaries and it's not interrupted by sap,
so I'll forego my SAP on this
provided I get the, the primary question. Okay.
My primary, I've got Carlos
and Jenny in front of you. Mine's very short.
I'm happy to, I'm happy to stay.
15 more minutes as well. Happy to
Stay 15 more minutes. There you go. We
Got time? Yeah, you go.
Um, Mr. Chair, Can I just, my chair
That designate into the Minister
for Mental Health Time, does it?
Yeah, we're gonna have to be careful there
because, um, we will, that we can probably do 10. Yep.
Happy to stay another 10 minutes and then
Thank you Mr. Jet. Yeah,
so there's been a, you know,
this government's doing a lot
of investment into infrastructure,
getting new hospital beds built.
What are we doing to make sure that, um, the historic issue
that's happened in New Zealand where we have, um,
depreciated assets, the book values quite low compared
to the replacement value.
Mm-hmm. What sort of, what sort of thinking have you got
to make sure that that trend
that's happened in New Zealand across multiple public
assets, including health, doesn't continue into the future?
Well, that's, that's a really good question.
And the asset management across the health estate has been
a challenge for some decades.
Uh, this is a, a problem which I think I believe has
developed over multiple governments.
Um, and it is a challenge that we need to address.
Um, health New Zealand, I think released a couple months
ago, the National Asset Management, um, scheme of, uh,
policy around how they are, uh, proposing to manage the, uh,
health infrastructure and ma manage the asset remediation.
Um, but that is certainly a focus of the,
of the health infrastructure plan is around remediation
of hospitals, uh,
and making sure that they are fit for purpose.
Um, and there's a number of major projects which, uh,
the next tranche will be focused on, such as toga, um,
Hawkes Bay, Palmerston North, uh,
because there are a large number,
particularly those regional hospitals, uh,
which do require significant investment.
And that's why we putting place the health infrastructure
plan, uh, so that there's a clarity around
what needs to be delivered by when.
So we're able to actually make that investment and, and,
and get, uh, that delivery done.
Supplementary estimates, $2.3 billion needs
to be spent on infrastructure every year in order to, uh,
deliver the contents of your own infrastructure plan.
Mm-hmm. Plan, you've only committed
to 1 billion in this budget.
Uh, you are clearly,
you are not even following the outlines of your own plan.
Yeah. So the, um, infrastructure that we allocated is
what we've allocated in terms of capital.
Uh, the Health New Zealand board also has, its,
has a capital plan funded through depreciation.
And so they fund, uh, a large amount
of infrastructure investment through, uh,
their depreciation fund as well. Will
That make that 2.3 billion?
Uh, well, ultimately Healthy Zealand's going
through the process of, uh, finalizing, uh,
their budgets at this stage,
but ultimately that, that both
of those numbers will deliver the total
capital, uh, that is required.
But as I said, this is not a problem that has developed.
And, you know, the health infrastructure, um, the state
of our health infrastructure is a problem
that will take time to fix.
It has developed over multiple decades.
Uh, it is gonna require multiple, uh, decades of investment
to ensure that we are able to deliver
that modern infrastructure that is needed for New Zealanders
for patients and the healthcare workforce.
And one more sup, I, my Mr.
Chair Nelson Hospital, no additional theaters
for Nelson Hospital.
And over 15 years, you are anticipating that 15%
of people who would need hospitalizations currently
can be cared for in the community.
Those seem like pretty heroic assumptions.
What makes you confident that you are delivering a fit
for Purpose hospital for Nelson?
Well, I mean, firstly, the,
the sculping exercise started when you were the minister,
um, back in, I think it was May, 2023.
Um, rubbish based, um, based on, uh,
and then, uh, updated modeling.
Um, health New Zealand's
and Health New Zealand provides estimates.
They do that on a regular basis.
Um, the, the issue here is, uh,
they have a bed capacity challenge.
No one's getting operations at
Nelson Hospital. That is a problem. They
Don't have enough beds. Uh,
they cancel lists
because there aren't enough beds for patients to go
to post-operation.
Uh, and so more beds means more operations, uh, so
that we are able to actually get on top of this wait list
and in the short term, the interim bed capacity,
uh, that we're providing.
And, and also, uh, significantly increasing number
of patients that will be outsourced in Nelson
To make sure we get through those Wait list,
what you have 15% of people who currently need
to be in the hospital can be cared for in the community,
or is this just another magical efficiency well,
that, that you dream of?
Well, I think when you were the minister, you,
you talked about needing to deliver more
through primary care and more care in the community.
That was certainly one of the
priorities that you focused on.
And it's a focus area that I continue
to have is actually do need to make sure that
where care can be delivered in the community, uh,
we should be supporting different
models of care, care. I've also run,
I've run a hospital in the home service
and I know who can be
discharged into them and I'm not seeing,
And those are all clinical decisions. Large
Amounts of older people can be
Discharged, and those are clinical decisions which
get made by clinicians.
All right. We'll go to Carlos for primary.
We've got, so we've got about just over 15 minutes left.
Got two government primaries.
I'd ask that you try and keep them fairly short and concise
because I wanna get to primary. Primary as well.
Oh, minister, it's good
to see all this data being published on a national, um,
newspaper rather than not just on the social media.
So my question is, based on the data here, talk about those,
um, childhood immunization program.
Um, so obviously in, in which area you want to see this, um,
the data or which area you wanna see improvement?
Yeah. So, um, health New Zealand has published not only
the five Health targets, uh, nationally
and by, uh, district,
but they've also, um,
published the primary healthcare organizations' performance
against the, um, immunization target.
And I think that's really helpful to, um, have
that information in the public arena.
I think around 90% of immunizations are delivered
by general practice, um, which, um, and so by, uh, and,
and a significant amount of funding goes towards primary
practice to ensure that they are
able to deliver that service.
And so I think it's helpful to understand
how are our primary healthcare organizations delivering.
Um, the table that they've published,
I think highlights there are, are many,
which are doing very well.
There are many which require improvement.
Uh, and that is one of the areas which is being, uh,
discussed as part of the PSAP negotiations around
how can we further support primary healthcare
to deliver our vaccination targets
because they play such an important role.
I said 90% of vaccinations, childhood immunizations,
delivered by primary care.
How can we support primary care to deliver more?
Uh, how can we incentivize them
and provide that support so that they can,
we can actually reach that target.
So what other additional resources
or support is available to support the immunization program,
especially to cover some, some of the community
that's hard to reach?
Uh, look, there's a range of different areas which the
government invests in.
Last week, uh, we announced the extension of the, uh,
immunizing, our Tamari program, which was launched by, uh,
my predecessor, the Honorable Dr.
Uh, Shane Reti.
Uh, and that is, um, that has immunized, uh, tens
of thousands of, um, of, of children.
Uh, or, or, or,
or maybe it's 10 tens of thousands
of immunizations, sorry, been delivered.
Uh, that has made a huge difference, uh, to support, um,
that target and that targets particularly those communities
where, uh, they are harder to reach.
Um, but at the end of the day, uh, we need
to focus based both on primary care
because that is where 90% of immunizations are delivered.
We also need to have other programs which focus on those
communities, which are harder to reach,
and that's where the need is.
And that's why we invest both into primary
care and in other initiatives.
And I want to ask this slide, I mean,
additional program targeting the Mori health provider
to increase the immunization way as well.
Do, do you ever have this program in long term can increase
the health outcome for our MORI committee,
or how to shorten their seven to X place being?
Well, we all know that. I mean,
immunization's about prevention, right?
So it's about preventing, um, a range of diseases, uh,
and improving the health outcomes.
Uh, and it is starting, uh, with those, those children
as when they, when they're born.
And so it plays such a critical role, uh, in terms
of the prevention
and, uh, those better health outcomes right from the start.
And so, yep, it is an area that we need
to focus significantly on.
The childhood immunization rates
for Maori is significantly below the average.
Uh, and that is where programs such as immunization,
immunizing our tamari, focusing on the need is,
is really important as well
as the conversation currently underway through psap.
And how can we incentivize
and support primary care to deliver more.
Really important to that.
Thank you. I'll go to Jenny
and then we'll go back to the opposition.
Thank you very much. Just wanna talk about, um, uh,
our young people that go and,
and have a, a lofty goal of becoming a doctor or a nurse
or working in our sector.
Um, just for a moment, focus on that.
Um, currently, I think around 300 odd students in Otago,
34 in the rural program.
What else could be done to ensure we have students who,
um, when they graduate, go into our rural
and our, into our regions so
that we don't have a concentration as we tend
to have had in the past, going to bright lights
of the big cities so that we have a, a, a greater spread
of those young people going out to the regions.
What programs or funding rules of course are you looking at?
That's the first part of my question. Second.
Well, I'll ask you to keep it quite tight
'cause I want to get back over.
It's literally one question, the two bit to it. Thank you.
Um, and the second part of that is, um, we hear a headline
that when our students graduate, um,
that they're heading off overseas.
So if, if I could just have some detail
around those international students, the Australian students
that we train, come doctors in New Zealand,
are they the ones that are heading overseas
or going home to Australia?
Do they influence those numbers at all?
Look, I think so thank, thank you for your question.
I mean, firstly, um, we need to train more doctors.
Uh, that's, that's really important.
Um, acknowledge, uh, you know, uh,
so last year we increased the number by, uh,
50 based on funding the previous government
allocated in budget 23.
We then increased it by 25 this year
and increasing by another 25 next year,
meaning over the course of this government,
a hundred more doctor training places, uh,
in our universities each and every year.
And so that is incredibly important
to provide more, uh, more access.
Uh, the point you're making around making sure that we are,
uh, focusing on our, our rural communities
is, is really important.
And big part of that is supporting doctors into
primary care pathways.
And that's where the focus of the, you know,
the NZ recs pathway is important.
Uh, the 50 domestic graduate doctors into primary care, uh,
and, uh, and supporting those pathways
and will play a role in helping to address that challenge.
Um, we also need to make sure
that we are incentivizing nurses to work in those,
uh, rural communities.
That's where the 400 graduate nurses, um, annual, uh,
support payment, primary care who,
who take on graduate nurses annually for five years.
It'll be $15,000 payment if they're in a urban environment,
$20,000 payment if they're in a, in a rural environment.
And so that's gotta focus on rural communities as well.
So a number of things we need to do, um,
and, uh, we continue to work, um, with, uh,
health New Zealand continues to work, uh, with,
with general practice around
how we can support those training pathways.
Again, I bring back to the, the 95 million uplift
for primary care, which has been going through the
PSAP negotiations at the moment.
Uh, by making sure
that we are supporting financially primary care, uh,
will also support primary care to be able to then open up
and create more jobs in those, uh, parts of the country
as well, which is really important.
And make sure that those, those jobs are attractive, uh,
for doctors to go and work in.
Thank you. A primary
Thank you Mr. Chair.
In February, treasury advised that to achieve, uh,
health New Zealand's intended deficit of 200 million at the,
uh, end of the financial year 25, 26, we've got,
they would need to cut nearly twice as much of this
as was sought for the preceding financial year,
given cuts of that scale.
Do you admit you can't meet budget without
cuts to frontline services?
There will, there will be an investment
increase in budget 2025, which will flow through
to increased delivery within the budget,
and we are very focused on delivering with the budget.
I'm happy to ask, um, to, um, speak to this
head of the health insurance unit. Thank you Minister.
Um, to you, Mr. Chair.
So, health New Zealand's forecast
to run a $200 million deficit next year.
So it will in, it will deliver, uh,
more services than it's receiving revenue for, um,
the treasury advice was from, uh,
before we've been able to
understand the Crown entity's financial performance,
and it has considerably improved since then.
What is the value of the cuts required in the coming
financial year to be able
to achieve the $200 million deficit figure
In the, in the coming financial year
In the one that we're discussing?
Yeah. So Health New Zealand is running a $200 million
deficit, and the government will fund that deficit.
Uh, I understand that, uh,
you have run Health New Zealand has run a savings or cuts
or reprioritization, uh, program, uh,
and will need to do so in order to meet that budget.
What is the value of that program?
Supplementary, I want to give the most Mr.
Chair to the opposition.
The answer to the question is,
health New Zealand will run a $200 million deficit, right?
And the government will fund that deficit.
This is Parliament. You're meant to be able
to be accountable to Parliament for public money.
This is an outrage that you're not saying
how much you're gonna cut from the health system.
There will not be, we are investing more than we invested
in this financial year,
and we will be investing in more services
to deliver for New Zealanders.
That is what we are delivering.
And the fo the,
the question you're asking has been answered.
There'll be a a, the Health New Zealand has a deficit track.
It will be delivering within that.
And my expectation is it delivers on the five health targets
for New Zealanders and delivers
those services within its budget.
Supplementary, when treasury, uh, estimated
that $1.37 billion was required
for cost pressures in the health system
and, uh, the, uh, financial year 25
pay equity contingencies set outside the health system.
Now the government requires 13 pay equity claims
to be settled from within health baselines.
Why didn't you increase the $1.3 billion figure so
that you can pay those pay equity PR payments?
Well, as, as we've said on multiple occasions, um,
pay equity is here to stay.
It's it's law. Um,
and there is a contingency which has been set aside, um,
within, uh, I think the Minister
of Finances has said this on multiple occasions.
There is a contingency that's been set aside.
Well, there's not for public sector pay equity claims.
Uh, and that will be, uh, dealt
with on a case by case basis.
There's not one more dollar
for underpaid women in the health budget.
Uh, we have, as I said,
the government has set aside a contingency
for public sector pay equity claims.
The Minister of Finance has said that two
More, Mr. Chair. And
it's exactly as it was before.
There was a, uh, there was a contingency set aside.
There remains a contingency set aside. I've
Got one from Carlos. And then
I've got two more question to you.
So, minister, if we don't actually rep
prioritize our spending
or adjust that, um, you know, financial deficit
in your point of view, what's happen to what's happened
to our healthcare system?
Well, we are very focused on delivering within the budget.
That's the focus that we have, is we have a budget
and we will deliver within that budget.
Um, and I note that the former, uh, minister
of Health Drisha Al sent a very similar letter
to the then chair of Health New Zealand, um, requiring them
to deliver within the budget.
So that is nothing new.
It is the approach that we are taking,
but I am bringing very strong emphasis on the word deliver
because patients expect delivery
and I'm very focused on delivering for patients.
Thank you. Back to Dr. Alfield of two subs and then her.
Thank you for the rest of the question. You
Foreshadowed the cabinet paper in March this year,
the need for a capital injection.
If Health New Zealand can't make cuts.
So why won't you admit it here?
That this budget is unrealistic
for maintaining service delivery?
I'll Ask, um, that, so
Mr. Chair
analysis was done with the treasury
to agree a cash position for Health New Zealand,
and that position has been agreed.
Health New Zealand has a deficit track
for hit of 200 million.
If that deficit track was changed to zero,
well they'd need another $200 million.
But the deficit track is a deficit track
and the government will find equity support
if needed to cover
That. Yeah, it's $900 million
less where this less than where this
Year ends 1.37 billion uplift in this year's budget,
which we focusing on delivery for patients,
including elective boost
By the deficit. My next
supplementary is when staff at Middlemore
saw a $3.6 million funding, um, increase,
what did officials prioritize saving lives in
that emergency department
or saving money to fix health New Zealand's deficit?
Well, the advice I've received is that
that request didn't go to the Health New Zealand board.
Uh, but what has been delivered is a number of initiatives
to provide more support to middlemore, including, uh,
opening up additional beds, putting in more, uh, uh,
clinicians into the emergency department, uh,
to provide more support during winter, uh, so
that we can continue to see patients
and ensure they get timely quality access
to healthcare. And that's the focus,
Nowhere near what is needed.
That's the focus, address, an unsafe department.
And that is the focus that I'm bringing as Minister
of Health is making sure
that the organization delivers for patients.
Thank you. We've got two minutes left.
It's all with hanana.
Thank you, um, minister.
Um, I heard from a nurse in Whakatane Hospital, uh,
following a comms that came from the deputy CEO for Manu
on the 13th of June.
And she was frustrated.
She shared how can any of these health targets be met
of basic, basic resourcing needs for our community
and hospital are not being met.
She shared that er here burning out mentally and physically.
She shared community health needs are deteriorating
and more and more complex.
She asked for more attention on rural health and resourcing
and where is the national plan,
provide implementation moving forward
into enhanced services.
So what do we say to who come to us that are tired,
that are stressed and stretched knowing
that there is under resourcing, like in Whakatane Hospital?
Well, the answer to that question,
and you know, firstly, we are, uh, incredibly grateful
for the work that is undertaken by all
of our healthcare work workforce across New Zealand.
Uh, and we are very focused on making sure we're investing
in more frontline staff.
Health New Zealand had nearly 1,689 more
frontline staff as at 30th of December, 2024 compared
to the 30th of December, 2023.
We are focused on investing in frontline services,
frontline workforce, so that we can do more for patients
and deliver more for patients.
That's the number again,
is 1,689 more frontline staff
as at 30th of December, 2024 compared
to the 30th of December, 2023.
We are investing in our frontline health workforce.
So minister, I have a frontline staff member contacting me
saying shorter stays and emergency departments.
How can this be achieved when they're understaffed?
Uh, they're under recruited and they're under rostered.
There's no, uh, sick leave cover available.
They're working so hard and they're stretched.
Then they go over to first specialist appointments.
How can this be achieved when there's not enough doctors
or specialists, nurses compared to the amount of patients
who are waiting for their first appointments?
There's a large array of concerns from the frontline and
There's always an a requirement
to invest in more frontline staff.
And I wish the previous government hadn't focused on
rearranging bureaucracy
and actually focused on frontline staff during their time.
That's what we're focused on. But you're complaining
We hired nurses.
Thank you everyone who has joined us today. Get your time.
Well, what happened to Lester
Commissioner?
Okay,
Tuesday, leg day, We got fresh.
Thank you. Maybe another It's good to say
Good morning minister.
Morning, Mr. Chair.
Very good. All right. Welcome, Mr.
Ducey and everybody else. Good to have you here.
Uh, we could be here for 30 minutes.
Uh, I'd ask if officials are asked to speak,
but they please keep it quiet
and try not to paraphrase the minister too much majority
of the questions will be with opposition members.
Minister, I'll open to you for some brief remarks.
Brilliant. Uh, thank you Mr.
Chair and, uh, thank all the members of
the Health Select Committee for having us here today
to talk about, uh,
what I think is very important area mental health,
addictions and, um, suicide.
And first, I'd just like to acknowledge all those
with lived experience.
Um, and I want them to be clear.
You've got a government that's got their back
and we want, um, lived experience, uh, the voice
to be heard a lot louder in our mental health addiction
and suicide prevention system.
And that's a commitment, uh,
to our lived experience community.
Look, yesterday we released the new Suicide
Prevention Action Plan.
Uh, we heard loud and clear from lived experience
and the sector and other parts of the community
that the previous plan was unfocused, had very unclear roles
and responsibilities, uh, and very little accountability.
So we published our plan, uh, yesterday.
It's the next five years.
Uh, it continues with many actions from the last plan,
but an additional 21 new health led actions
and 13 new cross-agency actions
plus an addict additional 16 million a year on top
of the existing $20 million fund for suicide,
um, prevention.
What we want to do with that plan, one
of the focuses is supporting people, uh,
in crisis and distress.
Uh, and we think there's a real opportunity, uh,
for people in mental health distress
and crisis to support them a lot earlier in prevention
and early intervention.
Today, we, uh, announced, uh, the latest data
for quarter three on the mental health
and addiction targets.
They are new targets for New Zealand.
New Zealand has not had mental health
and addiction targets before.
I'm happy to report for the one week access target
for primary mental health
and addiction at 80% with the target.
We have met that with quarter three, as
with the specialist services three weeks, uh,
access target for that.
Uh, unfortunately we didn't meet the one around 95%
of people, uh, being admitted, discharged
or transferred in emergency departments for, uh,
mental health and addiction issues.
And that is an area we are admitted
to focus on going forward.
Um, as well. Budget 2025,
we'll see another significant uplift to the Mental Health
and Addiction Ringfence Fund, uh,
and budget 24, it went up to 2.6 billion
after budget 2025.
That'll go up to around 2.8 billion.
We also announced a number of initiatives
that I'm quite proud of.
It's, uh, clearly constrained times
when you look at the economic headwinds
as government is facing.
So it was, um, a success I think
to get new money in this budget
for mental health and addiction.
Uh, one of those areas I'm very proud about is the rollout
of the new co mental health teams for too long.
In New Zealand, when people at a mental health crisis
call triple one, they get a criminal justice response.
People calling triple one
with a physical health crisis get a health response.
So we want to bring parity
and we want to ensure people calling triple one, uh,
when it's safe to will get a mental health response.
And that's what the co uh, rollout
of those co response teams, um, will do as well.
Uh, so Mr. Chair, uh, that is my introductory comments.
I would like to say I'm joined here, uh, with Audrey Sonen,
director General of Health, ministry of Health,
Dale Bramley, interim Chief
Executive for Health New Zealand.
Also Jeff Short, mental Health Director, ministry of Health,
kitty Richards Mental Health Act, acting Deputy
Director General of Health, clinical
Community and Mental Health.
Phil Grady. Uh,
this is a new role in Health New Zealand already delivering
a national director ask of mental health in
Addiction. We've done six minutes
and this is a half hour period.
We haven't done six minutes. Um, well, I, I just think,
think because people are here to be part of the,
the presentation, we should give them the
respect of being introduced.
I've only got two more. We do only have, okay, two more.
And then we'll, Andrew, I, deputy Director General
of Health Public Health, Steve Barnes,
associate Deputy Director of General Health,
and Jason Power Acting
National Director of Planning Funding.
Thank you very much. Over to you Mr. Ary. First question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
in the estimates it's very difficult to see
how the money is split across the appropriations,
but you've seen in the listener that there is $140 million
of new spent, and you said you've been very upfront
that workforce is the biggest area to ac barrier to access.
Today. Uh, we see a media report
that Southland Hospital is running on 50%
of specialist staff
and is missing psychiatrists and psychologists.
And you have talked publicly many times about
doubling psychology internships from 40
to 85 per year by 2027.
And psychiatry registrar training places
by more than 50% from 33 to 54.
Yet when we look at the documents that your officials saw,
uh, that were draft documents,
the psychology targets were originally 90
that went down to 50.
And that was because Lester Levy said, don't count, uh,
any psychologists in the public system only count the Health
New Zealand ones.
And your officials knew that.
And the psychiatrists have repeatedly said to you
that the baseline number should be 44.
That is information that your officials
and the Royal College put together.
So the baselines are different,
and this government depends a lot on targets.
Why are you gaming the targets?
Yeah, so look, um,
let's be very clear, and I've been very clear.
One of the biggest barriers to timely mental health
and addiction support in New Zealand
is too many workforce vacancy rates.
That is the reality of the system
that we inherited from the last government.
The auditor general was very critical of the last government
for having no standalone mental health
and addiction workforce plan.
Uh, that's what we published in our first year,
as you alluded to, we committed to doubling the number
of clinical, uh, psychology internship places from uh,
40 in 2023 to 80 in 2027
after budget, 2020.
But they were originally, We
Went through this last Session, but Mr.
Chair, he's not answering the question.
The question is why was the baseline 90? And
So under the budget 2025, we've actually increased
that in other five places.
Your question is how many clinical internship places do our
universities offer at the moment is 90,
but we want to be focused on
what Health New Zealand is funding.
Not the Ministry of Education, not the Ministry
of Corrections, what Health New Zealand.
This is about vote health. And yet, so we do, hold on.
So we do know that in 20, uh,
23 there was 40 funded.
And so we have committed to double, in fact,
we're going over that now to 85 in 2027.
So you are the only, um, part of the health system
that doesn't include the internships from other
areas in the public service.
The Health New Zealand website says to that all
of the numbers should be the public service in these
otherwise specified.
The only reason it was changed is as
after Lester Levy stepped in and your officials knew that.
Why are you having a different step? No,
I disagree with that because it was actually me saying
that because to be candid, I'm not terribly focused on
what the Ministry of Education is doing.
I'm focused on what's happening in health
to feel Health New Zealand funded roles in psychology.
So you can focus on the other roles I'm
funded on Health New Zealand roles.
It doesn't it look better for you when the targets have
changed because you had already achieved those targets
before you set them
and, uh, it looks better for you
to gain those targets. Yes,
But I, I don't think I can, uh, repeat myself enough
to say we are focused on Health New Zealand funded
clinical internship places.
Ricardo, I mean this much. Yeah, thank you very much.
Um, the government policy statement on health includes a
target to reduce asset as drinkers drinking
and a commitment to support improved health outcomes
through a population needs based focus.
And we know that alcohol harm costs the nation
$9.1 billion a year.
Um, as Ingrid Larry said, it's hard
to break down the appropriations in the budget.
And so, um, what specifically is in the budget,
if anything, um, specifically to curb alcohol related harm?
Yes. So we fund the, uh, mental health and addiction
and suicide prevention ring fence funding
that will increase up to 2.8 billion this year.
I'm quite proud of this government.
Uh, it increased the alcohol levy first time in 15 years
and we increased it to go up from 11 million to 15 million.
But to tell you, what we want to do though is to make sure
that funding coming out
of the alcohol levy is spent on new services on the ground
that will make a real difference.
I'm really proud of my colleague, Dr.
Shane Retty, who announced our first FASD action plan
that the alcohol levy will fund.
Are you using any additional, uh, resources, um,
beyond the, the revenue gathered by the levy
to fund some of these programs?
Yes. Public health is funded for alcohol programs as well
At a greater amount that you previously did.
Well, like I say, the RINGFENCE has increased
Primary. Thank,
thank you Minister. Um,
what has the government done to increase access
to special specialist forensic services
and rehabilitation services?
Yeah, look, hey, good question.
Uh, it's not an area of the mental health
and addiction system, uh, that gets a lot of profile, uh,
and quite often doesn't get the necessary funding needed.
It was important for me to increase the number of beds
for forensic, uh, mental health facilities.
We know there can be a weight
for our mental health forensic beds, uh, which can result,
uh, in people inside prisons not getting the access
to psychiatric care they need.
So we've announced, uh, $51 million that will fund
18 new beds.
That also is reflective of actually
how expensive these beds are.
Probably some of the most expensive beds,
uh, in mental health.
So it's important that we, uh, fund this area.
Not only that we are funding, uh,
further wraparound support as well.
Mm-hmm. Um, just three really quick
ups up my may, mr chair.
Okay. The first one, uh,
what funds have been reprioritized to pay for that?
Exactly? Where have they come from
That will come out of the mental health
and addiction Ringfence uplift.
So it's a reprioritization.
What services are not going to get funded as a result?
Well, it comes out of the mental health
and addiction ringfence uplift.
Okay. Uh, so
has the overall spend on forensic addiction service services
through the programs run by corrections,
and I realize that's a different vote.
Has it increased or decreased since?
Well, you will have to ask the corrections minister that.
Have you provided any advice to them
on the efficacy of the programs?
Because we've seen that some of the long term providers
are no longer being considered for contracts
or haven't been successful.
That is because they have adjusted their, uh, spend for CPI
and there are new providers now
with no experience in prisons.
Have you provided any advice on the efficacy of the programs
and are you confident that those programs will work?
So, as you know, corrections has actually increased the
level of mental health and addiction services
across remand prisoners.
But that is a question for the minister.
That's, that's the output.
If I, if I can just finish by answer, uh,
let's be very clear.
Corrections fund, as you know, those services,
when a prisoner requires psychiatric care, they're required
to go into a forensic mental health inpatient facility
that is funded by Health New Zealand.
That's why we have increased the budget
for forensic support, this budget.
Next, thank, thank you minister.
And you mentioned the ringfence.
Um, what was the RINGFENCE in 2024
and what would it be in 2025?
So, uh, in 20, uh, budget 2024, our first budget,
we inc incre, we increased it around 200 million from 2.4
to 2.6.
Uh, this budget, it will go up from 2.6 to
around 2.8 billion as well.
Uh, it's important, uh, that we fund better mental health
and addiction services,
and that's what this government is committed to doing,
Cover that. So
primary, why, why do you think it's important
to have 25% spending on, uh, prevention?
Because what we do know in mental health addiction
and suicide prevention, if that we can get in a lot earlier,
we can prevent people getting into further distress crisis
or needing specialist mental health and addiction services.
So that's why as one of our five new targets,
we have set a requirement that 25%
of the ring fence funding is spent on prevention
and early intervention.
Mental health is about early intervention for those
who go on and have lifelong enduring mental health illness.
50% have symptoms
before the age of 14, over 75% symptoms for the first time
before the age of 24.
So it shows that we can do things a lot earlier.
Not only do we prevent people going into special services,
but actually the real outcome here is ensuring people get
the support and go on to live meaningful lives.
Jenny, you hit us up. No, I was primary. Okay, cool.
Um, that takes us to Hamish. You have a primary. Um,
Yes, but I'll, I'll Ask government members
to keep it pretty tight and short back over
Here. Um,
yeah. This, this will be quite, quite specific.
Um, I not in the budget, the $28 million, um,
to fund the transition from a police led response
to a mental health response.
Yes. Um, how will this program be rolled out?
Um, and can you just talk through the programs that police
and Health New Zealand are working on? Yeah,
So that's actually quite a package within that 28 million.
Not only will it roll out co response mental health teams,
it will roll out 10 of them.
It is also funding, um, 20
security guards within our emergency departments as well
to ensure that we have safer, uh,
emergency departments and handover.
Um, it's also funding 20,000 more events
through 1 7 3 7 to ensure people can get timely access
to heli telehealth.
And also funding a service called EMHR earlier
Mental Health response.
That is in our triage facilities
for people calling up the triple one center.
'cause what we want to do is build up a better response
to crisis from when people call up,
they get better triaging.
They might get a telehealth response if that's deemed as,
uh, uh, appropriate.
Or they might get sent out the mental health, uh,
co response team,
which is pairing up mental health professionals with police.
'cause let's be very clear,
if you're in a mental health crisis,
having two police officers turn up
with tasers is not potentially the right response for you.
Thankfully, police are still committed
to turning up in times when there is that risk of harm
to the individual and others.
But what we want to ensure is we have a mental health
response, not a criminal justice response.
Mm-hmm. Can I, um,
what role do peer support
or those with live Sure.
I've got everyone on the list too, Scott, questions.
What, what role do peer support, um,
people play in the system?
Well, peer support is very important.
Uh, at times people
who have experienced the mental health system
and have lived experience have been stigmatized
and discriminated against.
What we do know is actually their experience
of the system is, is a strength.
And through lived experience, we can learn from them how
to build a better mental health system.
I'm calling it the Quiet Revolution, not because it's new,
but we're really getting some traction.
And not only that,
we're actually doing more than lip service
of acknowledging lived experience.
We're actually funding new FTE roles
to employ them within the system.
So we're rolling out peer support,
lived experience workers in emergency departments for those
who turn up in a time of distress
and crisis, to talk to someone who's been there
before, not to tell them what to do,
but to share their story.
And that's already operating around the country.
And the feedback I get making a real difference.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you. Staff.
Um, the program is going to be rolled out fully in four
or five years, but already we are in phase two
with phase three of
that police withdrawal due later this year.
What's been rolled out? Sorry? The,
the mental health response, uh, the,
the police withdrawal.
And you have said, and it's been,
been reported in the post What's police?
Sorry, You're talking The multi-agency response
that has been reported in the PO in the DOM post will take
four or five years to roll out fully.
So how is it a police withdrawal when you're pairing
mental health professionals with police to go
Out? So what you
have said,
and we have, uh, evidence of, uh,
people driving mental health.
So evidence, we've just read it in the
News. We, I have spoken
to mental health workers
who have driven sometimes three
or four hours to an emergency department,
and police have made the decision that, um,
it is not appropriate for them to accompany
because there's no risk of danger.
Who is better placed to make that assessment?
A mental health worker or a police officer?
Well, I think what we've got to do in mental health is
to put the politics aside
and not be misleading in the public.
I think what you are doing are you, and sadly, excuse me,
The minister the minister is talking here.
Yeah. But he's just accused me of being misleading. I spoken
Well, well I'll validate that by following up,
by saying it's misleading to go out there
and say police are withdrawing.
And what's misleading is to conflate two programs
that are going on at the moment.
One is the transition from a police lead triple one response
to a multi-agency triple one response,
which is primarily the co response teams pairing up mental
health professionals with police.
That is a four to five year program
that's gone through cabinet.
We saw $28 million committed to it in this budget,
and we will roll that out.
Another program called the Police Change Mental Health
Program is ensuring people
with mental health issues get a better level of service.
And what that means is, in phase two, if you go in
with a police officer to an emergency department,
you don't wait hours sitting next to a police officer
with a taser in a brightly lit room.
You'll be tra you'll be transferred
and handed over within one hour.
If you are assessed for needing mental health support in a
custody suite, you won't sit there for hours.
You'll be transported
to a mental health facility in 30 minutes.
That should be supported.
Yep. And yet we are hearing from frontline workers,
and I have spoken to them personally, that some
of them are traveling several hours to emergency departments
with the clinical decision about whether they are safe
or not being made by a police officer.
And my question is very simple.
Who is better to make that decision?
A police officer or a frontline mental health worker?
It's be very clear when there is a risk to the individual
and the others police will still attend.
And who makes that decision, minister?
Well, the, we have a governance group at the moment
between police
and mental health who, uh, have
put in standard operating procedures
to ensure each phase can happen safely.
So it's not one or the other making a decision.
It is following a standard operating procedure.
And I think we need to be very careful here
because our police do a great job who are committed
to supporting people in a time of need and going out
and saying they're not turning up
because they're refusing to is misleading.
Or they're looking in the back of a car
and making a decision that the person is safe to travel,
which is in the particular case.
I'm thinking about one final set, Mr. Chair.
Um, the, uh, co response teams, are any of them going
to be 24 7 or will they have, uh, limited hours?
At the moment, we have, uh, five pilots.
Uh, you all know we have pilots
because your government canceled the funding
for them in 2018.
Our government started, uh, they, they, they are committed
to 40 hours of service at the moment.
What they do is look at the data
and work out, uh, the highest need times.
I was visiting the Wellington Pilot yesterday.
I've been to North Shore.
They are seeing around 25 to 30% of the calls.
That is the model we are following at the moment.
If there is a greater need to roll them out further,
I'm happy to support that.
So what happens in the interim if it's outside
of the hours when the co response?
Well, it goes back
to the existing arrangement we have at the moment
where either police go out
or crisis assessment teams go out, or individuals
and their families and friends take them
to the emergency department. Thank
You. Janet.
Primary, thank you very much.
My questions today are gonna focus around rural communities
and the support that they need.
And I noticed, uh, uh, like many of us,
you're at the field days in Hamilton last week.
Um, can you talk about the initiatives, um, relating to
rural wellbeing?
Rural mental health, please?
Brilliant. Hey, um, another hat.
I'm responsible for rural health.
Uh, it's quite an exciting role.
I do enjoy getting out on the frontline, uh, being myself,
uh, growing up and living in North Canterbury.
I I understand the pressures of regional
and rural New Zealand and they're quite exacerbated when you
talk about health.
So two things. Uh, one, I was, uh, excited to announce, uh,
$3 million of funding to our 14 rural support trusts
who do amazing work going on farm in a time of need.
In fact, I spoke to a lady at Phil Days who was quite open.
If it wasn't for the Rural Support trust,
she would not be standing there telling me her story.
That is quite powerful.
And so that's why we've funded Rural Support Trust to get on
and do more of that frontline work as well.
What I'm uh, especially proud about with Rural Health, uh,
is the Minister of Health's announcement of, uh, rolling out
after our support, 98% of Kiwis will be able to,
uh, go to an after hours, within one hour drive.
That means a lot if you live in rural, uh,
and regional New Zealand.
Um, it's, it's gonna be, uh, require a,
a very focused implementation.
Uh, there will be 27 rural sites
and over 50 remote sites for us to build up
that after hours network.
We are committed to rolling that out before the end of 2027.
And what that means is that when you ring up your GP
after hours and it's closed, you go through to Healthline,
they will triage you.
Uh, if you are well enough
to wait till the GP practice opens, they can actually,
now they announced it in the last couple of weeks,
book you in at your GP practice.
You might be unwell enough that you get picked up by say,
John's or you go to an emergency department.
But for that middle group, uh, we are requiring
after hours support, they will ensure you have access to an
after hours appointment within one hour's drive,
that might be going to your local facility
and it been opened up for you
or your local health
professional visiting you in your house. Thank you.
Great. So please, Mr. Chair.
So Ingrid, Larry, thank you with that, um, $3 million
for the Rural Wellbeing Fund.
Did that go through a transparent and contested procurement
For, For the Rural Wellbeing Fund?
The Rural Wellbeing Fund?
Yeah, so the Rural Wellbeing Fund is, uh, $2 million
that has been funded by MPI Health.
New Zealand is committed to, uh, uh, uh, matching that.
So it goes up to $4 million. Did
It, did it go through a contested, um,
transparent process?
Um, and, uh, as I was saying, so it's a $4 million fund
that will be a contestable fund where we've asked for
that $4 million to be matched fund by the sector.
So it now grows to $8 million.
That will be the Contestable fund, very similar
to the Mental Health Innovation Fund,
which I know you're a big fan of. All
Right, got Ricardo.
Just ask one more. Sup please. One more.
Sup and then Ricard's, just put these contestable funds,
which requires a co-fund.
And I understand you've taken the mental health innovation
co-fund down from 200,000 to a hundred thousand
to make it more accessible for those who don't get to apply
because they just, it's out of their league,
but their frontline providers.
And then, for example, last week they were handed contracts
that for a year at the last minute rolling over
with a whole lot of new terms
and conditions, uh, that they weren't able to negotiate on,
including being able to get their funding cut
or have their intellectual property used
and given to another provider.
Are you comfortable with that contracting process?
Yeah. Would that be the standard contractual process
that's happened every year, including after the,
The last labor Government or
Just provisions, the new provisions, maybe
An area of priority now that you're in opposition. So
So you've come in and said
that you're intervening to make it a better process.
Yeah. You last week,
Yeah, you wanna get rid of singular contracts.
I mean, you could have done it when you're in government,
but we want to move, but you've
Had whole lot of draconian terms to them.
Those were not terms that were in in labor.
You, your government, your officials have added those
and you haven't responded yet to whether you are satisfied
with those new provisions.
And yet the the contracts are still only a
year, uh, not two years.
Are you satisfied or are you going to intervene again
and ask your officials to change it
and make it a negotiated?
What what I've asked the officials to do is a move
to multi-year contracts.
I think it's not good for the service
nor the people employed to not have commitment
for longer than a year in their employment.
People have mortgages.
They, they quite rightly have pressures in their life.
They need commitment and I'm
happy to give them that as well. And yet the
Have changed. The
second thing I've asked the officials
to do is actually look at, um,
whether we can change the contractual process
at another time of the financial year.
I don't know if that's possible,
but I've asked for advice on it
because there seems to be a pressure that builds up
between the start of the financial year.
Officials have told me that has been historical over time.
So I'll be looking at that issues.
The first question you raised is about the threshold
for the Rural Wellbeing Fund.
The match funding comes from the sector,
not the service provider.
So what we might be looking as a service provider
or a community group, probably with a rural wellbeing fund,
that would be the nature of the applicants.
They will be of to apply.
It will be funded by NPI Health New Zealand,
and we're looking that to be matched by the industry sector.
So you can imagine some of those industry bodies
as well. Okay. We've
Got a got a really quick, really quick set of questions.
Did you explicit explicitly factor in the social
determinants of mental health
and the projections on child material hardship when it came
to making budget decisions?
Look, uh, we always factor in those issues,
but we've got to understand
what is in our control within Health New Zealand.
This is Vote Health, right? Yeah.
So we look at what can, uh, vote Health respond,
but let's be very clear, as part of my role, uh,
it's not only looking at the mental health
and addiction ring fence funding, it's
how we work across government.
So just to give you an example,
if you look at the Suicide Prevention action plan
that we announced yesterday,
there was 13 new cross government actions
that those departments, whether it be MSD, ot,
veterans, uh, uh, corrections, those departments,
and those ministers signed up as well.
So of course we have those discussions
across governments as well.
So when it came to the allocation of free sourcing, um,
did you consider at all explicitly, um, the need for
greater resourcing in the mental health space due
to the fact that we're gonna see more children growing up in
poverty and in stressful, often precarious situations?
Yeah, so if you want to take one area
of focus is maternal mental health.
Um, sadly, um, one of, uh, the biggest
contributors to the loss of life.
Um, and we are doing a lot more in the space.
I'm, I'm going to be announcing something soon.
The first 2000 days is important to us
and we want to show what we intervene a lot earlier.
And, and it, as I said in my introductory, I mean,
mental health is about earlier intervention by nature.
And we want to get up a lot earlier in the life course.
So the more we can do for young people
to ensure they live stress free lives
and have greater wellbeing is gonna be the benefit.
Not only the mental health system,
but the country as a whole.
Thank you Minister. Thank you
everyone for being here today.
Appreciate your time,
James. Appreciate
it. Thank you all. Thank you.
What orange water green.
Your, your gift to us. Your love to us.
And I don't know why.
Nice. B cheese. Was it good? Yeah.
Smelled a bit smell, but Right. Was it a bit rip?
No, no, it was good. No, no, it wasn't,
it wasn't ripe at all.
Oh, okay. Alright. Dip stock
in the gallery.
Made straight to move on to the next We are, yes.
Down, down the end. They're all waiting.
Hello Todd. Aren't we all?
Hi Todd, how are you?
Hey, thanks. Good, thanks.
The, oh go uncomfortably.
Least you wearing that?
No, you're on the, you're on
the right from their point of view.
Excellent. Welcome Minister Seymour and officials.
Very good to have you here for 30 minutes today.
Um, I'd ask if officials are given the, the opportunity
to speak, then please keep it brief
and try to paraphrase the minister.
The majority of questions will be with opposition members.
I'll open it up to you, minister
for some brief open remarks.
Alright, well, look, it's a real pleasure to be at
what I hope is this, uh, polite committee if, uh,
high levels of Korum
and, uh, especially to speak about phar, um, on my rise.
Brendan Boyle, the acting, uh, chief Executive.
However, he will not be acting, uh, too much longer
because you may have seen, we've recently hired, uh,
someone I think will be excellent, uh,
after a global search coming out of Canada, um,
to run Farm Act soon.
Uh, and on my left, um, as usual, uh, is the,
the excellent chair, um, the honorable Paula Bennett,
who I think has done a fabulous job in the last year or so.
Um, FAC has dealt, I, I think primarily
with an enormous influx, uh, of money, uh,
which it has turned into medicines.
If there's one thing that people at Farm Act really like,
uh, it is buying medicines for New Zealanders.
Uh, and they've been doing a huge amount of that 83, uh,
new listings or widened access, uh,
funding investments in the 20 24, 20 25 year, uh,
31 of that being new listings in 52, uh, widening access
to more New Zealand as a total 4.1 million.
Uh, new Zealanders received by the funded medicines, uh,
devices, um, or related products.
Um, and in the coming year, uh, we're going to have, uh,
a combined pharmaceutical budget of 1.76 billion,
which is a, a record, uh, by any standard.
Um, and a product first of all, of,
of filling in quite a significant, uh, fiscal hole that we
or Cliff that we inherited.
Um, and then, uh, putting a, a very large amounts
of additional money in, um, in order to satisfy, uh,
the government's stated goals of increasing the number, uh,
of cancer medicines.
Um, a total, um, as I say of
of 64 new medicines have been, uh, funded 33 of those cancer
and 31 non-cancer, uh, since June, 2024 when
that uplift, uh, took place.
Uh, and the uplift, we'll see, uh,
around about 200,000 New Zealanders benefit.
Uh, besides that, um, we are investing in upgrade, uh,
to information technology, which I think is long overdue.
Uh, and we're doing considerable work
to improve the culture, uh, of pharma.
And I will wind up just after referring to two awesome.
Uh, I think quite significant events
that have occurred recently.
Um, one, uh,
is the change in the astro uh, patch.
Uh, these hormone replacement therapy patches became first,
uh, a source of controversy because of global shortages.
Um, but then because the patches
that were initially proposed to be funded, um, were some,
were ones that a lot of the users found uncomfortable.
Um, phar really is, is listening now,
was once it might have had a reputation
for being quite calcified.
Um, it has actually listened to the patients
and is now going to fund, uh, an alternative so
that people will have, uh, more variety.
Um, a very similar thing happened, uh, around insulin pumps.
Uh, there was, uh, a decision
to fund a certain type of insulin pump.
There's a lot of very negative feedback about that.
Uh, and so we decided, um,
or at least pharma decided, uh, in line
with the new direction to be more responsive
to patient concerns, um,
that they'd go back to the drawing board.
Uh, and again, they've made an alternative available.
So I think that's quite a big shift in,
in phar, uh, culture.
And we're certainly seeing from, uh, patients, clinicians
and vendors alike that they feel that, uh, phar is now, uh,
a lot more receptive.
And I think a lot of that goes, um, to the cultural change
that our chair and our acting chief executive are driving.
So I thank them for that.
Excellent. Thank you, Vera.
Thank you Minister. And, uh, thanks
for the tradition you've established with this committee
of turning up and answering questions.
We really appreciate it.
Is it correct that from one July
publicly funded cancer medicines will be funded
for patients in private healthcare
for the 12 months from the date
of each medicine being funded?
Yes, that's correct. So, uh, if a new medicine is funded,
we don't want, uh, a person
who had commenced their treatment, uh, in a private setting,
um, to have to transfer to a public setting in order
to get the benefit of the public funding.
Now, taxpayers, they paid for it.
If it's publicly funded for someone with their condition,
they should get the benefit of that.
Um, and when someone's undergoing cancer care,
as I'm sure you, you know, better than, um,
than anyone being a doctor, uh, you know,
it's very disruptive to have to change the location,
potentially change the oncologist.
Um, so we we're now going to make sure
that they have a seamless experience.
Insurers will cover medicines funded by p
and most people receiving pri uh,
private cancer care have insurance, the vast majority.
Why did you introduce this change that will mostly
subsidize insurance companies
with minimal improvement in access to the public?
Um, well, first of all, you have to look at, um,
an insurance companies, uh, financial statements.
The first thing you notice is that all of their, uh,
revenue comes from the premiums, which are paid by,
uh, their clients.
Those clients are also New Zealand taxpayers.
Uh, and I believe that if they've paid their taxes, they,
the rights of New Zealand citizens, uh,
they should not be disadvantaged, uh, by the fact, um,
that they, uh, have taken the precaution
of having private insurance.
What's more, uh, they would be able to access, uh,
the pharmac funded medicines, uh, if they were
to do it in a public hospital.
The only difference we have made is that they don't have
to inconveniently change hospitals in order
to get the public benefits to which they're entitled.
You've just, uh, described that a number of, uh, uh,
new medicines, 12
or 13 have been introduced new cancer medicines
and in over the last year,
and those people will have transferred to the private system
for, for their treatment.
So it appears to have occurred without
that much, uh, disruption.
Um, so what is the problem you're trying to fix with this?
Well, first of all, I just, um, our chair wanted,
I think might have wanted to say something.
Oh, I could answer that as well.
But, um, they will still have to pay
for the administration of the medicine.
Sorry, so just so that you're clear about that.
So we're paying for the medicine, but if it's, um,
I'm clear about that. Yeah,
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So that's where,
but um, yeah, like you,
You still, but the, excuse me, the, the patient,
they would, currently, what happens is that when they, uh,
when a new medicine is funded by pharm,
that becomes funded by their insurance.
So the patient is no better off from this change except
for the site where the care is occurring
for a period of 12 months.
Yeah. So this money
that you are spending on this is achieving almost nothing in
terms of access.
It is just a subsidy at a private insurers.
No, I, I completely disagree.
First of all, um, I would not minimize, uh,
the inconvenience, uh, of a person having
to change their arrangement in the middle
of a course of cancer treatment.
That, that, that is, I mean, when you,
when you're getting treated for cancer,
you just don't want any more problems in your life.
No more inconveniences. You just want to get through it.
Or at least that's what I've observed
and people that have gone through that.
Um, the second thing is, uh, you can argue, uh,
that it's a subsidy for insurers,
but actually, uh,
insurers don't have any money other than what's paid to them
by the patients.
So ultimately, this is a subsidy for the patients
who are also taxpayers who are entitled
to public funding in this country.
Can I just also add that we had correspondence from, um,
from people who were certainly in private care
and had insurance, and then we'd funded one
of those medicines in the last, in the last 12 months,
and they were eligible for, you know, four treatments,
and actually they needed 12.
So to receive the other eight, they were gonna have
to move into the public system.
And that was very much him saying that he is in the,
you know, he's tried a number of different treatments.
He's now doing this one.
The thought of having to change an oncologist
and just to get access for those extra eight treatments
that he desperately needs was incredibly
Stressful. The vast majority
of New Zealanders do not
have private insurance.
Wouldn't this money have been better spent on hiring
oncologists in the public system so
that people can get free care there?
Well, I just, I just disagree.
I I think you can, you can always say, um,
we could do more if we were prepared
to exclude some New Zealanders
from the benefits of a program. Well,
Everyone is eligible for care in the public system.
Finally, we received documents from your office,
which makes it clear that you prepared
to announce this policy in April,
but then no announcement was made.
Why didn't you make this change public?
Um, well, again, I, I don't recall why I did
or didn't announce it.
Um, generally pretty keen to announce, uh, anything
that is happening in my portfolio.
That's good. There's, there's no reason that I can think of.
I can come back to you if you'd like,
but I, I can't think why that would be.
Question. Thank You. How much point to order ms.
Um, sorry if I'm missed. What was that?
Sorry, Ingrid Point of order. Point of order. Ingrid there.
Thank you. Um, um, I may be miss seeing,
but is that an act label you are wearing on your coat?
'cause I understand under the roles that you're not allowed
to wear, um, Hardie,
You know, what if, if it would make you Wow.
If it would make you happy, um, I'm very happy
to, to take the pin off.
Thank you. Um, no problem, mate.
It's good to have one role for everybody.
Well, I, I look forward
to discussing that principle with you.
Another former of forums.
Excellent. Very much. Thank you, minister.
How has Farm Act delivered value from, um,
the investment put into it,
which is now a record, record investment?
Well, um, we have funded vast number
of additional medicines.
Uh, 64 new medicines, 33 of them being, uh,
for cancer, 31.
Uh, not being for things other than cancer.
Um, and, uh, for the people who are in those physicians, um,
you know, it's not really for me to say, uh, other than,
first of all, it can save your life.
Um, it's, uh, just a, an enormously positive thing.
And, um, look, it's not me that's done it, it's the,
the taxpayer and to some extent this
government, uh, that's done it.
But, uh, it has literally saved people's lives.
And there's a total of, of 200,000, uh, new Zealanders
who in some way have got a, a medicine, cancer
or non-cancer that they wouldn't not have got, uh,
had it not been for this uplift in funding,
Sorry, I missed this number.
How, how many more medications have been funded
Total of 64. 64.
That's from, and that's from that additional funding.
Mm-hmm. That, that came from the government.
But I think it's also to prove that that Farm Act model,
in some respects does work, is
that they've then also done about another 19 medicines on
top of it as their business for usual, if you like,
where they making money, savings and able to fund.
So overall for the whole year, there were 83
of then 64 were from the, the new funding, the 604 million.
And the other 19 is then negotiating,
getting a better deal and
Doing what they do. Yeah. So, so
just to be clear, um, pharma is,
is continuously, uh, trying to get a better deal.
Um, and, you know, they, they do their best work, uh,
making sure that if there's been a price drop somewhere in
the world, they're, they're there to make sure that that
discount is gained by New Zealand patients.
Uh, last year,
or from, at least from the 2023 to 2024 year, um,
they managed to save $162 million that they would've
otherwise had to spend, uh, basically
by shopping around for a better deal.
They do that continuously.
It's $162 million of extra medicines that we now have.
Thank you. Um, Jenny, you have a prompt.
Oh, thank you very much. Um, previously you've talked about,
um, measuring broader health
and economic benefits relating to, you know,
more medicines going through to patients.
Where, where's that piece of worker to give us sort of
Update? Yeah, so this
is something
that I'm personally really excited about.
I, um, well first I'll ask your question.
Where, where it's up to is we've had expert advice
by a professor out of the Netherlands.
Um, he's provided a report that is informing, uh, the way
that farm, uh, goes about making its budget bids.
Um, budget bids are a pretty tough business.
Um, so we didn't secure additional funding
in the budget this year.
Um, but we are, um, indefatigable, we're indefatigable, uh,
and we'll, we'll keep using this intelligence
that we've been able to procure, uh, to make the case
that if the government gives more money to pharma,
then it will be able to fund more medicines
and those will actually save, uh, money, uh, elsewhere.
So, uh, we we're obviously really excited about this.
Um, and I believe in the long term, uh,
pharma ACT's role will be to advocate for more use
of technology, not just medicines, but also devices.
And say if we had more technology in the healthcare system,
uh, then the people who are very valuable, but,
but you know, there's never gonna
be enough people in healthcare.
We need to use technology to make the people, uh,
more effective at caring for the patients.
Um, so that, that's very much part of our agenda.
We've had the work done. Uh,
we didn't get the money we hoped
for in the budget this year.
We accept that because frankly, we've had so much lately.
Um, but, uh, you know, we're never gonna give up.
Could I perhaps jump in and administer?
Um, in addition to that, we recognize, we have a team
of health economists that obviously do the analysis
because it's a relatively new
and emerging area we have to upskill.
So we're putting time and effort off the back of the work
with the Netherlands train up, build more capability so that
as we do head forward potentially into budget 26,
our ability to deliver that in a robust way is enhanced.
So you'll be providing through the chair, um, greater,
a greater sort of backstory for a budget than,
Yeah, more, um, With data to back it up,
More evidence based on some potential real scenarios
with a couple of, uh, a couple of areas of health need.
That's the intention. I
Mean, the world's kind of talking about obesity
and the, um, the effects of that.
And then of course you're seeing, uh, you know,
very different treatments coming through
and the effects that that can have on people's
whole livelihoods from a societal impacts,
but equally from a health, you know, is really interesting.
And, and, and as I say,
whenever you're on any of the forums,
which we occasionally are, you know, via by online,
you can just see that's very much the, the talk
of the world from a health perspective as to how you use,
you know, um, continuously use expensive,
but you'd be money saving in the end.
Carlos Minister.
Um, just now you mentioned in your opening remarks
that you're changing the culture of pharma to, to try
to listen to patient a bit more.
So fu what channel you
actually received those feedback right now?
How many? So we've, uh, done quite a,
an extensive program.
There's been an external reviewer who has
gone into Pharma Act, talked to a lot of people, come up
with some conclusions, uh, confronting for some people.
But the, the change is happening, uh,
our new chief executive, I think will,
will make a very big difference as, as has our acting,
uh, chief executive.
And really this change has been driven very strongly,
uh, by our chair.
Um, previously there have been, uh, patient forums, uh,
but the feedback that I'm getting from people involved in
the medicines industry, uh, the clinicians and,
and the patient groups as they're finding
that when they go along to these, um, sessions now with,
with pharma, uh, that they're getting listened
to a lot more intently
and they're getting real change out of the way
that pharma operates.
Um, so I wouldn't say that we've changed the structure of
what we do, but I think we have changed the sincerity
and the effectiveness of it.
And I, Paula, I might like to
Add. Yeah, well, it's really
exciting.
So at the moment, we're setting up, um, a, uh,
con consumer workshop.
And so they have, they're electing their own chairperson of
that group, um, that group
and have eight to 10 people on it.
And as a consequence of that,
they will be actively involved.
It's not just a, Hey,
we're thinking about doing this medicine.
It's the HTA process that we're using.
They will be getting actively involved in the, the changes
and the transformation that was already started within Phar,
but seeing how that rolls out and, um, yeah, and,
and fast tracking some, you know, lower risk medicines and,
and how we might do that as so, so
Is there any example of those chair
I want go over to the office?
I'm wary that too many question.
So is there any example that those patient voices
or feedback actually changing the decision of our
Oh, very much so. And
I mean, the minister gave two great examples, um,
those two where we might have slightly got it wrong,
and, um, we've got some real challenges with supply, um,
and for, uh, out, out outside of our control, if you like,
um, for a variety of reasons worldwide.
And so how we then, you know, A DHD medicines are one
that's, you know, controversial at the moment.
So replacing that so that people get the kind of,
but it's can be quite, um, confronting to have
to change your medication that's actually working for
You. Thank you,
Minister. I hope you can Make
a better job
with this question than, uh,
earlier on in the hearing with another minister.
Uh, your government has invested 600 million
into cancer medicines over four years.
How are you tracking the impact of that on cancer survival?
Um, that's not something that I can give you a, an answer
to and numbers.
Um, however, uh, what we do know is that, uh,
pharm ACT's objective is to ensure that what we pick
as the next medicine off
or the next cab off the rank is going to be the optimal, uh,
cancer survival or extension and,
and quality adjusted life years.
Uh, so I think we can be quite confident
that we are getting the best bang for buck
as pharma always have.
And bear in mind that we haven't reserved funding
only for cancer survival.
We've actually put, uh, those cancer yes,
understood medicines up against non-cancer medicines, uh,
a according to the same measures.
Um, so I, I guess, you know, it would be nice to, to think
that we had a bespoke assessment of this funding.
Um, but for my money, uh, where we're at with pharma is
that we are still not spending anything like, um,
the OECD average for share
of the health budget on medicines. Well,
Perhaps I can tell, and we've got some distance to go.
The government collects the raw data required
to measure cancer survival measures cancer mortality,
which is a different thing, $600 million, much of it
for cancer midterms.
Say you're concerned about outcomes,
why don't you report cancer survival?
Well, again, I, I, I think where we're up to,
I'm speaking purely for pharma
and all I know is that pharma is always picking, uh,
the best quality adjusted life year outcome, uh,
for each extra dollar that it gets.
And I believe that we could spend a lot more money
before we get to the point
that we're getting diminishing returns,
and also make the point
that we're trading off cancer survival against all
of the other objectives that we have with medicine.
So, uh, you know, you, you,
you can argue there should be a bespoke measure.
However, um, it's good enough for me
that we're always buying the highest value for money
with each extra dollar that we get.
And I believe we've got a lot further to go
before we've spent too much on medicines in this country,
In the out years, the, uh, increase
to the pharmaceutical budget get substantially less
after double digit increases under both governments, 4%, 2%,
0% is the out years.
What headroom is there for new financial,
new purchases in the, uh, in the coming, in the current
and coming financial years, either from, uh,
that uplift or from savings?
Uh, well, first of all that the uplift, uh,
will be subject to future budgets.
And as we've, as we've discussed, uh,
we we're certainly prepared to, um, you know, argue
for more funding for medicines
and devices, uh, by, by making the case
that this will make healthcare more productive
and save the government money else elsewhere.
So that's underway. Uh,
and that'll be subject to another budget bid process.
Uh, in terms of savings, obviously
that depends on market conditions.
And a pre prior year, we saved 162 million, so
that's about 10% uplift, um, just
through greater efficiency.
Uh, and then there's the question of notwithstanding savings
or, um, the, the new initiative we have to argue for a whole
of society benefits.
Uh, if the government has good fiscal conditions,
then hopefully, we'll, we'll put even more money in.
And finally, minister,
I'm aware this wasn't a commitment you made,
but other parties and government made a commitment to
patients with blood cancer that hasn't been, um, able
to be upheld through this initiative.
Do you see an opportunity to, uh, address, uh,
that outcome which has been very unfair for those, uh,
patients whose medicines were not included in
the cancer medicine initiative?
Uh, look, look, I, I get letters from people every day,
uh, affected by blood cancers.
Uh, I've had, you know, people very dear to me who, uh,
have been lost to blood cancers.
So, I, I, I, I can't stress enough that funding
medicines for blood cancers is one
of the most important things we can be doing.
I also have to say that, uh,
I will never support, uh, a world
where a politician chooses which medicines get funded,
no matter how strongly I feel about it.
Uh, my job is to leave the, the experts, uh, who, uh,
do the assessments based on the value for money
for the whole of the New Zealand population
to make those decisions.
My job is to advocate to get more money for, for phar.
Um, I, I, I think I've done a pretty good job so far.
I think we've got more than
anyone ever thought we could get.
Um, but I'm gonna have to sharpen my pencil
and keep trying to get a bit more money so that, um, I, uh,
can, can write some better responses to those letters.
Ana, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister.
Um, what consideration did you give
to the potential impact on Maori health outcomes when
directing AK to stop embedding Ang in operations?
Uh, the same consideration that I give, um, to, uh,
European Asian Pacific Island, uh, middle East African,
uh, same consideration as every single human being
who pull this country home
and has a right to pharmaceuticals under this agency.
Do you believe that it's appropriate
to direct a Crown agency to deprioritize
ang considering the legal obligations outlined in Paya
as well as the government policy statement for health?
Well, the treat is a 180 5-year-old piece of paper.
I'm interested in getting the best, uh,
health technology assessments, buying the best medicines,
and extending people's lives the best we can.
Um, regardless of whether their ancestors got here 800 years
ago, like some of mine,
or just got off the plane at Auckland International this
morning, uh, we all have equal human rights.
And so, what evidence did you base your decision
to direct operations to remove from operations?
The fact that every single human
being is alike in dignity.
And in terms of ang, does
that still exist within the organization?
Uh, we'll refer any management decisions
to the chief executive.
We know that there's been a disestablishment
of the Maori Health Directorate.
Is this a result of deprioritizing Maori health outcomes?
Well, no, because we haven't
deprioritized Maori health outcomes.
We prioritize all New Zealanders health outcomes equally.
And so, when we think about the seven to eight year, uh,
difference in life expectancy for Maori, uh, do you think
that by moving to the side, uh,
that the agency is still focused on
improving Maori health outcomes?
Well, absolutely, but I just make the point that some
of us, uh, Maori and we don't feel disadvantaged.
Uh, there are many reasons why people have
different life outcomes.
And to simply lazily group people by their ethnicity, uh,
is not only an ineffective way of prioritizing people, uh,
it is also, uh, divisive.
And that's why this government has issued a cabinet circular
that all services should be delivered on the basis
of needs, uh, not race.
And you have to ask yourself, if you're prepared
to go down the track of lazily grouping people
by their ancestry, are you really prepared to accept all
of the consequences of doing that?
'cause if you really start thinking through it,
if you're prepared to say that somebody's outcomes are an,
an artifact of their ethnicity
or their ancestry, then presumably
that is good outcomes and bad outcomes.
And presumably, if you're going
to allow positive discrimination against a group
of people based on their race to try
and compensate for bad outcomes, you imagine,
then you would have to be prepared
to sanction negative outcomes against the person.
Let's, based on, let's talk about need the minister,
'cause you've spoken about need.
If Maori are dying seven
to eight years earlier than non Maori, should
that not be a focus for far?
And, and how is far going
to improve Maori health outcomes if Tega is not a priority?
Well, I've addressed your question,
and what I'd recommend is that you re-watch the tape
and hopefully get it the second time.
Excellent. Uh, questions from members. Dr. Ferrell,
You've vindicated work on a medicine strategy is underway.
How will that strategy work?
Sorry, the medicine strategy? Mm-hmm.
Um, well, as you know, there's, there's quite a number, uh,
of objectives throughout the strategy.
Um, and we intend to implement them one by one.
Um, I I can go to a more specific one
if you'd like, but yeah.
Uh, you have work underway on medical devices in your
letter of expectation.
Mm-hmm. Uh, can you update on the progress with that? Yeah,
Absolutely. Um, so
as far as medical devices go, uh, going back to 2012,
I believe there's been ambiguity about whether the correct
role, um, of, of Phar
or Health New Zealand previously the DHBs, uh, was
to be the assessor and procure of medical devices.
Um, I think it's fair to say I would like to see
that ambi ambiguity gone
and Farm Act either in charge of devices or not.
Uh, that's an ongoing discussion
between myself and Minister Brown.
Uh, there's been some work by the Ministry
of Health advising us on that.
At this point, we're not really that happy with the advice.
I don't think they've got to the number of the issue.
Um, but my commitment, uh, is to, well, at least by,
at least by the end of the term, I hope by the end
of this year, uh, to have decided is it, uh, phar
or is it Health New Zealand, or is it
someone else that does devices?
And my preference is that Phar should do it
for the simple reason that I want to see p as an advocate
for health technology within healthcare.
And I want to see, um, pharma, uh, as, uh, I, I guess
that the organization that is most efficacious, uh,
at assessing technologies and doing procurement,
Gonna Isha and then Hamish,
The How about Hamish and come back to me.
Well, We've, we've got two minutes left, Matt.
So, so there's an increasing amount
of innovation in in the medical, medical space.
What changes, if any, are pharma doing
to kind of keep up with it?
Um, well, I, I, I mean, you know, I, I don't know
that we're doing anything different.
We just know that there is so much coming at us.
If you look at the graph
of cancer treatments being invented, it's,
it's not a, it's not going like that.
It's not going like that. It's actually going like that.
It's accelerating exponentially.
Uh, and that means that we need to, uh,
continue working as fast as we can.
We're upgrading our software.
We're putting $7 million into that.
'cause they had quite clunky systems.
Um, but ultimately, uh, it, it's not really a matter
of doing something differently.
Uh, it's just being prepared, uh,
to do it better and faster.
Thank you. That, um, leads up to this question very well.
Both governments have found the Cancer Agencies assessment
of medicines, which you'll correctly describe
as an overwhelming number of new medicines in,
in the cancer, um, for cancer.
Uh, both governments have found that helpful.
Does the government have a plan to continue that, uh, type
of assessment, which I'd describe as having an element
of international comparison about what's funded
and a lens in terms of, uh, its clinical impact?
Look, I think what we really need to be doing, uh,
is first of all, sticking to the pharma model.
I, I'm completely committed to an arm's length, uh,
you know, data driven, scientific science-based entity,
uh, run by an independent chair with Chief Executive
distance from the Minister of Politics,
making the decisions.
Uh, the next point is, uh, yes,
there will be the Cancer Control Agency.
Yes, there will be other countries
that will have their own assessments.
Um, but our job is to ensure that this entity as efficient
as possible, listens well, uh, makes fast decisions, uh,
and has as much cash hosed in the backend, uh,
as the taxpayer's prepared to put up.
And my job is to advocate for that.
Minister, thank you very much and your time today.
Thank you very much.
Thanks. It starts.
Hello.
Hello, minister.
Welcome Minister Costello and Officials.
Good to have you all here. We have you here
for 30 minutes today.
Um, I'd ask a few refer questions to officials
for the officials just to keep it, uh, concise.
Try not to paraphrase too much.
We don't that much time, as you know.
And so the majority of the questions will be
with the opposition.
I'll hand it to you now for some brief introductory remarks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like
to touch on just a few key points across the, um,
portfolio areas that I have.
Um, budget 2025, which you'll be aware,
provided 7 billion increased in Vote Health operating
funding over the forecast period.
The funding includes an investment
of 24 million over four years
to give older New Zealanders greater access
to age residential care outside the hospitals.
The Timely Care Transfer Initiative was developed
with the age, um, sector in 2023,
but had time limited funding that would've come to an end.
The funding supports older people to have
better rehabilitation and recovery in the community.
It also helps free up hospital beds
for people requiring treatment.
This initiative and the funding uplift for this year comes,
um, this year come while we develop solutions
for long term sustainable model of aged care.
Uh, additionally, the government has worked underway
to develop the new medical products bill, which will provide
for risk proportionate regulation
of medicines and medical devices.
Unlike the Therapeutic Products Act,
there will be a greater recognition of the differences
between medicines and medical devices,
and a strong emphasis on international harmonization
Cabinet has also agreed to develop standalone legislation
for natural health products.
And I'm leading the development of proposals
for the regulation of these products.
In close collaboration with Minister
for Food Safety Minister Hoard.
In regard to vaping,
the coalition government has taken action
to crack down on youth vaping,
allowing vaping has contributed
to a significant fall in our smoking areas,
but we want to protect youth against vaping.
Um, some announcements were made yesterday in this regard
in regard to emergency air services,
we're rolling out new emergency helicopters to replace some
of their aging ambulance fleet.
The, these will provide more reliable service,
improved capacity to respond in bad weather conditions,
reduce maintenance costs, and greater fuel efficiencies.
Um, Ong received a replacement air
ambulance helicopter last year.
The first brand new helicopter began operation in March
and will support people across Waikato,
Corman, and the King country.
The upgrades are continuing
and near new helicopters now working out of Auckland,
and two will be in shortly.
I'm happy to take any questions. Ms. Chair?
Uh, Ingrid, hit one. End Up first.
Thank you. Um, minister support workers are being paid 63
and a half cents after their first 15 kilometers of travel,
and yet most of their travelers work related
and the Superior report, um, makes note of, of that issue.
And now their pay equity claim has been cut.
What modeling did you do, uh, to understand the impact
of the cutting of pay equity claims
around aged care on the sector?
Bearing in mind that in Australia, they've done the reverse,
they've actually given a 15% uplift since 2023
because they don't want to be gouging the sector
or relying on, uh, immigration.
So I think your question is about the supporting the care
sector, which is, um, we are working
through the final stages of the contract uplift under this
financial year, um, that is working well
and it's, we're working.
Um, I think it's, um, announcements will be,
um, provided shortly.
Um, in terms of workforce capacity, we fully appreciate
that, and I think that's
where we see the biggest investment will be in the in-home
community support program.
I think the pay equity claim is slightly, you know, the,
the, as, as we've talked previously about this,
is about uplifting of the wages overall,
which I think is part of the, um, contract uplift as well as
how we manage that workforce moving forward.
And there is a larger program of work that I'm working on
around how we support the aged care sector overall. Did
You do any modeling to see what the impact
of cutting the pay equity claims would
be for care and support workers?
No, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't do any modeling on the,
the pay equity claim.
Um, I am doing a lot of work around
how we support the sector and insurer that is remunerated
and we support the capacity in that sector.
Um, and we'll be making announcements in that program work.
Are you concerned that the sector is, uh, huge shortages
that people are disappearing to Australia registered nurses
and so on as a result of some
of the frontline cuts in the fact that, uh,
now pay equity has been cut as well for care and support?
Doesn't that concern you in terms of the longevity
of the sector and our ability to be able to have a workforce
that is essentially New Zealand based?
Okay, so, so from my recent engagement when I first
took on this role, yes.
Um, nursing workforce was a
significant issue for the sector.
My recent engagement was the aged care sector, that those,
um, nursing skills staff level is not the primary issue.
They are very concerned about continuing
to build their workforce, but at this point in time,
I've received no evidence that that is a significant issue,
that the aged care sector is what I'm concerned about.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Do you stand behind the procurement process for vaping kits?
Sorry. There was some issues I, I'm aware of with, um,
health that was an operational process that they went
through, um, around the procurement
of the vaping starter kits.
Um, I'm happy
to let officials answer those questions. Please
Tell us what those operational issues are that
They were, there was some, um, decisions that were made
around the vaping starter kits and how it was procured.
Um, there was, um, a due diligence process.
There was some concerns raised around
that due diligence process afterwards.
What was wrong with the due diligence process?
There was concerns about the connection
between the supplier.
Um, and that was, you know, I I can leave it up
to health officials to resolve that.
This is your hearing minister. Yeah. Official.
This is your initiative.
Can you please say whether you stand behind the integrity
of your procurement process?
Yes, I do stand behind the
integrity of the procurement process.
There was no, there was some concerns raised, um, through
that procurement process, and it has been addressed,
Documents released to us appear to show, oh, sorry,
that documents released to us appear
to show officials at Health New Zealand
cold calling Mission brands
and asking how they could work together.
Is that an adequate procurement process?
I'm, I'm not sure of. I'm, I'm sorry.
I can't answer what they, that official document
that you're referring to, I'm not sure what
that document is you're referring to
As Gonna, Hey, chair, and then I'll come back to you
On, on, on vaping.
And yesterday it was the day that
that's not disposable vapes.
That's not a ary
About it. Suppose we we're
talking about vaping chair.
Point of order. Mr. Chair. Ingrid, Larry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, first I wanna compliment the chairing
that you have done today.
Thank you. It's been great. There is a sustained line
of questioning here, and I think we were getting
to a point and it would be really good.
I don't feel that the supplementary was on the sustain
sustained line and was very tangential.
And it would be great just to get my
Colleague That would be asked to me to the,
and what I've been doing generally is one primary
and then three subs,
and then if we have someone calling for a SI will go to them
and then I'll go back to the person who asks the primary,
which is what happens in the house.
Well, mm-hmm. T talking about kind of vape control,
um, we've, we've seen the ban
of disposal vapes come into effect yesterday.
Do you have further work in this area to further combat, um,
uh, youth vaping rates?
Yeah, so, so there is a technical advisory group
that's been established.
They'll report back in August.
Um, there's a number of, um, uh,
interested connected parties working together
to provide further advice,
both in achieving the smoke-free 2025 goal
and what we would look like into the future for, um,
you know, how we resolve the youth vaping issue.
Um, reduce that demand as well as, um, continue to support,
um, the smoke-free objectives.
So I'm expecting that to report back to me in August, um,
with further recommendations is how we deal with those.
Um, at this point, those new
initiatives have just been rolled out.
Um, we've made a significant investment in the compliance
and enforcement component, um,
and we'll see what dividends that, um, drives as we work
through this process of the new
regulations being better done.
Do you know what the investment is in enforcement?
Um, overall we have, we have 18
dedicated smoke-free enforcement, um, offices, um,
working in this space, I think when I came into this role,
we had two dedicated, so we've made a significant,
the other part of the, um,
really critical investment is the reporting
and dashboard reporting about the what has being delivered,
the, um, compliance, the, um, targeted, you know, shopping,
um, secret shopper type initiatives
and as well as the enforcement infringement
process that's been applied. Dr.
Well minister, I would like to take that opportunity to,
uh, question the official who oversaw the, uh,
procurement of the vaping kits. They're in the room.
Are they in the room? Yep.
Thank you. Ms. Woodley,
can you please explain the procurement process
for the vaping kits
and why it is that in an official Information Act document,
it appears that, uh,
health New Zealand officials are cold calling a, um,
a particular brand
and setting up a procurement process, uh, uh,
basically for them.
Why was it not the case that a request
for proposals was put out for, uh, a significant, uh,
procurement over the threshold?
Thank you. Um, we did undertake a direct procurement for
that, uh, particular initiative.
Um, it is a pilot or trial initiative.
Um, we are looking to see at what the uptake is for, um, use
of vaping within a, um,
within the smoking cessation provider.
And off the back of that, we'll make further
decisions about what we do next.
Can you clarify by direct procurement mm-hmm.
You mean that a process was not gone through,
that was competitive and open all,
Um, the issue, uh, was with the paperwork.
Um, so when we, uh, the interim c at the time, um,
asked for a review of that,
and we did not put in adequate paperwork,
um, as a result of that
Permit, did you run a process where a clear request was,
uh, made for all comers to be able to participate in this?
Or did you approach one provider?
Uh, there was not a open process.
Um, there was consideration of a few providers
and there was a direct procurement of one.
Were you directed by the minister
or anyone from the minister's office
to approach that provider?
No, we, uh,
this was an operational decision taken
by Health New Zealand. Were
You influenced by the fact that, uh,
what did you make in determining to contract with, uh, relax
or if that's how, or relics, uh, of the fact that, um,
uh, did you assess whether
or not their current products on the market are
compliant with New Zealand law?
Um, we did get advice on that, um, both in terms
of the regulations, um, that were currently in place,
and we have did get confirmation
that they were, um, compliant.
Why in the course, in the emails back
and forth with the, uh, supplier is the ministry
and the is Health New Zealand,
and the position of being told by the supplier
what concentration of nicotine is appropriate for a vape.
I think that might be related to the person
who was doing the emailing,
but we separately got confirmation from, um,
the Vaping Regulation Authority around, uh, the contents.
Why is the memorandum titled
HNZ 0 0 0 7 9 4 1 1 on the Smokefree
Innovation Fund not yet released in the advice received
by the minister, uh, listed in the advice received
by the minister in September?
Uh, I'm not sure. I'd need to come back to you on that.
What a mess. Right.
Um, we have subs,
Just a quick sub back to the, um,
compliance enforcement component, um, that you mentioned.
18 people will be involved in that, um, that program.
What's that gonna look like compared to
what we had when there were two compliance, um, officers?
I, I, I think one of the, um,
the positive outcomes is the, the reporting that's going
around in terms of the amount of, um, the, the amount
of connections that we're making with the sector, the, um,
issuing of infr notices each school holidays.
We run a program where we target, um, specific shops
and do, um, you know, test buys, um, to ensure
that compliance level.
I think it's been a really, um, positive process.
We're seeing good outcomes aligning to the, um, this work as
of late last year, um,
when we passed the legislative changes,
there was an increase in penalties.
So we've made a significant investment
and the supply of disposable vapes, for example,
has now increased to a $400,000.
Um, fine.
So we, we've got some good deterrence, um,
at the infringement level.
We've doubled those penalties, um, from the individual
to the business so that we know
that there is a stronger deterrent
and we'll continue to track and report that.
Thank you.
Yeah. Minister, having heard from the official
before around, um,
the direct procurement process undertaken, are you satisfied
that there was not undue influence out of office
or direct in operations in terms
of the way that they're facilitated? Uh, really
Abso absolutely satisfied. Mm.
Um, if I may continue on with this line of questioning,
um, understanding that, uh, vapes are across the country now
and, uh, 30% of vape stores
are now within 400 meters of a school, uh,
across New Zealand, and yet the regulations say 300 meters.
Um, in a place like Kaiko here,
we have 17 vape stores now, minister, uh, which is huge
for a small rural community.
Um, knowing that you've got a commitment to smoke-free 2025,
but also, you know, the value of vapes as being a tool
for helping to quit smoking.
Um, are you viewing, uh, the way
with which there is a saturation
and there's, you can see the numbers in terms of saturation
of, uh, vape stores within low socioeconomic
communities like Kaiko here.
Um, is there an urgency around, well, is there a means
to restrict, uh, the opening of vape stores, uh,
in these types of communities? So
There is a restriction now in terms of,
we've added in the, um, proximity, additional proximity.
The challenge that we had was that, um,
these vape stores were established
before any regulation came in place.
So we are working through, um, a number of reasons that,
so across the country, there is just under a thousand,
I think 990, um, specialist vape stores.
Mm-hmm. The remainder are the generalist vape stores,
which is, you know, the, the,
the saturation that you're talking about.
What I believe with the increased enforcement
and the ability to apply fines
and, um, force compliance, I think we will.
'cause if you appreciate the specialist vaping store license
to trade doesn't, isn't transferable.
So once those, um, business are held accountable,
but as I said, there is a technical advisory group working
through where to from now.
And in terms of moving forward, I think there has to be, um,
a balance as, as we recognize that we want to, um, continue
to ensure there is availability for adults
who are using vapes as a quit smoking tool
and strongly restrict any use access.
That's why the display restrictions have come in.
Um, and again, you know, I,
I appreciate the situation on kaiko.
It's not the picture we want,
that's why the display restrictions are in place as well.
Um, we don't want them to be able to show and display
and attract the demographic that we're trying to protect,
um, and further the enforcement components.
So I think collectively there is some really good
initiatives and, um, I've, we'll continue to work through,
but I am looking forward to the technical advisory group in
terms of what more we can do in the next stages.
Um, on top of the enforcement component,
I'm sorry, talk it out. It does feel
like there's been an explosion
of vape stores throughout our rural
communities in particular.
Yeah. So wondering about new budget
or funding towards, you know, the youth vaping focus, um,
which we could apply in a place like critical here. Yeah,
We, we, there is work done by the quit smoking providers
to connect with those youth to help them work off.
We are looking at other, um, you know,
there is programs already in place, um, to support that,
you know, getting away from the vaping, um, dependency.
Um, we, the encouraging thing I think is if you looked at
the, um, recent ASH survey results,
I think three years in a row, the year 10 survey has seen,
seen a decline in youth vaping.
Um, so that's an encouraging, um, point
that we may have peaked.
We don't wanna sit on our laurels,
but I think there's a still a lot of work we can do.
Um, and the quit smoking providers have been really useful
in that, um, frontline engagement as well.
So, you know, I'm very open to that next stage of what we,
we look to, um, whilst we protect the availability
as it is cessation tool.
In closing with you, um,
and recognizing you've revised, you know, the
smoke-free 2025 action plan and that,
or it's an audacious goal, 5%.
Yeah. Um, you know, prevalence across the country
and all populations.
Um, we know that Maori sit at just over 14th.
Um, what is the, are there definite targeted approaches
to try and support Maori
and bus fika to quit smoking and achieve that goal?
Yeah, absolutely. And I'm, I mean, Silas here
to talk about the, um, I'm actually meeting
with the frontline quit smoking providers next week
and the week after those frontline workers.
We have some really fantastic, um, Maori
and Pacifica driven campaigns
that are targeting into those communities.
And we know that, you know,
when we've got 80,000 people, we need to quit smoking.
The quit smoking services aren't going to deliberate,
but it is a narrative that's really positive.
Um, I just attended, uh, event with the, who had worked
with the churches to connect, um, and,
and drive that family.
The youth awareness was really positive.
So I think there's a lot more we can do,
but the frontline agencies that are working, um,
and Maori Pacific are driven campaigns.
Um, you know, they are outstanding. We just need more of it.
Um, so we are looking at, you know, how,
how do we support them more?
So my, um, program meeting with them next week and the week
after is actually understanding
what else can we do, what more can we do?
The, the, um, providing the vape starter kits came from
that dialogue.
We haven't evaluated how successful that has been.
Um, but that's responding to, um,
what those frontline workers are asking for to help connect.
Um, and we'll continue to do that.
Uh, we have Ingrid with the primary
Thank you, um, with the age, sorry,
Sorry, hold on. Those are
all subs. Oh, no, no.
Yeah, those are my subs, but I've got a primary two.
You've got a primary I'll go to
And I'll come back to you Just regarding,
uh, aged care.
I note that there are no performance indicators,
virtually no performance indicators.
Is that acceptable given that you are a minister
with responsibility and there's no way of measuring
what the outcomes are?
So in terms specifically, what are you talking about?
Residential aged care in home, just
In general, and it's actually a comment that's been made
by the auditor general as well, that there is a lack
of performance indicators.
Um, in fact, I can only see one, which is around bed nights,
and I'll come to that in a moment.
But do you think there should be some indicators?
I I think that we've got a couple
of issues going on within the aged care sector.
One is that we have, um, a huge amount of compliance
and monitoring and, um,
controls within the age residential care.
I think there's nine different agencies that, um,
manage the compliance component within the age
residential care sector.
I think that can be streamlined and made a lot effective.
Um, there was under the previous government the appointment
of the age care commissioner
around managing the complaint component.
So I think there's a lot we can do to simplify In terms
of the targets, what I'm really focused on is, um,
is a plan around
how do we develop better investment in living well
preventative medicines.
Um, and I'd be very keen to look at some of those things
around how we connecting quit smoking,
early engagement. So thank,
Um, working, Moving forward.
Um, one of the input measures is 119,000 additional
bed nights in the virtual
Age Sector to rejected 9,000,700 and
or so that's come from Minister Brown's press release on
May the 22nd.
Where does that modeling come from?
Where does that figure come from?
I'm sorry. I'd have to talk to officials.
I'm not sure which report you're actually talking
About. I, I continue
that. Um, Mark Powell, group manager
of funding says it has come from primary
and community sector modeling completed earlier this year.
And that seems to me that it's based on aged care beds being
built by listed companies.
Is that how the modeling has been done?
Sorry, mark, sorry. Mark's here. Sorry.
Excuse me. Uh, the figure comes from our modeling
of the forecasted additional demand over the next 12 months.
And where does, where do you get the numbers from?
Is it through the age residential care sector?
Uh, it's based on utilization from the previous year,
plus looking at demographics, um, such as, uh,
statistics, New Zealand projections, older people.
Um, and so then it's, it's simply a forecast
of what's expected in terms of increased demands.
Okay. Um, so just two responses to that.
One is, um, if it is based on residential care
and listed companies, what happens
to people who can't afford that?
And secondly, what are you gonna do going forward now
that the census is being, uh, canned
and that's where some of your
modeling apparently comes from?
Uh, so there's two questions here in terms of,
um, affordability.
Um, at the moment, uh, our analysis shows that there's
sufficient bids for now, the challenge for the health system
and for the sector is for the aging population, is
to make sure we've got future supply available for
that growing, uh, population.
Um, and that's
what the Aged Care Funding Model Review is trying to do is,
um, ensure that happens.
Uh, in terms of the modeling, um, the
population demographics is obviously an important part of
that, but there are other, um, data points
that we can use to forecast.
Thank you. My final question's just to the minister,
have you got the Superior report
part two, and when are you going to,
Um, I think it's, it's very close to being released.
Um, have you seen it? Yes, I have seen it. And
How long have you had it on your desk for?
Um, I think I received it end of last year.
Um, and then it went through to, um, um, I received a copy
of it with, when it was sitting with health.
Um, I, I dunno the exact date.
I'd have to confirm that for you.
Thank you to my colleague.
Um, it was recently reported
that oral nicotine pouches are increasingly available
for sale in New Zealand online, despite this being illegal.
What are you doing to stop this?
Um, at the moment, this is the part
of the broader discussion from my understanding.
Um, the patches had always been available
for personal purchase.
Um, that personal use, um, I could stand corrected on that,
but that was my understanding
that you could purchase it for personal use.
It's the supply that was the issue.
Um, if there is, um, illegal supply in terms
of online sales, um, that would have to be dealt with
as an operational complaint,
Well, it's in the newspaper
that this is being sold illegally.
What are you doing about it?
So I can refer to is that there's been a complaint.
There will be, um, it will be investigated,
but I I haven't done anything specifically.
It's not, it's a very operational matter about
The law being broken as an operational matter.
Sorry. The law is being
The enforcement, the enforcement of law
and regulations as an operational matter. Yes. Uh, the
New Zealand First National Coalition Agreement commits
to reforming the regulation of oral nicotine products.
Is that still your intention?
That is part of the advisory group is working through as
to the availability of other products when they would be,
whether they would be supportive of the cessation
or achieving the smoke-free targets.
Um, that is all with the advisory group to report back on.
So is it correct or not that cabinet has taken a decision
for imprint for approval of the deregulate, uh,
deregulation of oral nicotine?
There has been no cabinet decision in that regard.
No cabinet decision. Uh, are you, um,
uh, is it your belief that oral nicotine, um,
uh, oral nicotine pouches a part
of a harm reduction approach to smoking cessation?
My personal belief is there is evidence
that it is being used effectively as a harm,
a reduced harm, um, product.
Um, but again, I am waiting for the advisory group
to, um, report back.
What, what is that evidence
In terms of other countries that have used, um,
those pouches who have achieved a lower
smoking rate than we do.
Would you be sharing that, uh, advice with the committee?
I just said it was my personal view and
but your, your personal view was that it was evidence.
So wouldn't you be sharing that evidence with the committee?
There is reports that existing, I, I
can source where those come from.
Um, but I'm that, that's why I've set up the advisory group.
So there is no suggestion
that I am influencing the f future outcome.
This is why I'm waiting for the advisory group
to report back on next steps
to achieve Smoke Creed 2025. Well, we'd love to see
That evidence.
Thank you for that.
Um, what's your portfolio, um, for maternal health?
Um, I wanted to bring, um, a to you on behalf of community.
So you may have heard about the Hiko, uh,
for Whakatane Hospital in February this year, uh,
where the community, um, walked the streets
and protest at the fact that, you know,
there's chronic understaffing, uh, specialist maternal
maternity services basically we're being
shifted toga hospital.
Um, I've been approached,
and I bring this to you as a mama, um, around,
uh, the loss of a baby since then.
Uh, so on the 25th of April, uh,
baby Navy passed at Toga Hospital
and, um, her mom reached out.
Uh, and within your portfolio, um, it would be great to work
with your office to unpack, um, what happened for Mama
and baby Navy, um, knowing that, uh, baby passed
and, and hard circumstances and staff were stressed
and stretched at toga.
She's a wha based mom, but she went there
and there was a crash C-section.
Um, a CC declined the mama to get counseling, um,
saying that, you know, uh, you can sprain your ankle
and get a CC, but you can't
for the counseling that you need.
Um, so on behalf of Baby Navy's whanau,
they would welcome working with you.
Yeah. And, um, providing some outcomes for them
as they're in this time of grieving, uh,
but also, you know, healing as they move forward.
Yeah, and I'm more than happy,
and I know there has been a lot of work to resolve, uh,
the workforce crisis in Tane and,
and how we can support, I know there has been a turnaround,
um, but I'd be more than willing
to talk to you further about that.
Yeah. And, um, get some answers for you.
Thank you. Got time for one last question,
Ingrid. Um, why did
you sit on the Superior Report
for six or seven months? Why have you not released
It? So, health
New Zealand was working through, um,
the implications of that.
So there, because we were in, um, it was put in context
around the superior report so that there wasn't,
there was nothing, um, um, withheld
for any reason other than we wanted to make sure
that the information, the superior report was, um,
received in context and
that we were making that context. Mr.
And Chloe, when are we going to see it?
Um, as I said, it's, it's due imminently.
I think we were meeting with the officials within a couple
Weeks, a month. Yeah,
I would say within the, within the next few weeks.
What, and are you concerned by the findings in it?
I mean, it would seem unusual to be sitting on it.
The first report was fairly damning about particularly pain
conditions for aged care workers.
Yeah, the, the f the first report was really understanding
where we were at in terms of future demand and capacity.
This report was looking at a whole range of how,
how we would respond and deal with those.
And we wanted to make sure that we were appreciating, um,
how that was going to land.
Um, and plus we were working with, um, the sector
around the contract uplifts
and those sort of programs at the same time.
Um, so it was a matter of, you know,
where we were sitting on that.
It was, um, yeah, the report.
Um, and we are closely engaged with the sector.
We will continue to be closely engaged with the sector
to work forward into a future state
and what, what we look like, um, in terms of improving
the aged care system
and providing, um, earlier interventions
and the whole support of the sector and building capacity
and all of those challenges that you'll be well aware of.
Thank you, minister. We're at time.
Appreciate your thank you.
Your time today and everyone else too. Thank you.
Sorry, can't read what? That's
Good Afternoon.
Alright. That's only a 15 minute session with you.
I thank you. You and your, your team yourself available.
Uh, I'll open it up some brief introductory remarks,
very brief, and then we'll go to question. Thank.
Well thank you. Look, I will
just make a few brief remarks.
Uh, firstly I'd like to acknowledge, uh, you the chair, uh,
Sam and our members of, of this committee.
I'd also like to thank the Health Research Council along
with officials, uh, from Ministry of Business Innovation
and Employment, uh, of which I have Danette Olson, uh,
the general manager, uh, for science investments.
And, uh, Heather Feeney, who joins us as well,
who's the manager for specialists, uh,
in Vince, uh, investments.
They're here with me today.
And obviously I want to acknowledge the Ministry of Health
for their ongoing work and support.
Uh, as the Minister of Science, innovation
and Technology, I'm responsible
for budget processing the health research Fund
through Vote Business Science and Innovation.
The Minister of Health is responsible
for connecting the vote to the needs of the health system
through the, the Health Research Council
who administers research funding to deliver the prosperity
and quality of New Zealand, uh, that New Zealand deserve.
We wanna ensure our health, science
and innovation system is optimized
and focused on the right things.
That means investing in research
that both delivers health outcomes
and also drives tangible economic failure value
health research clearly plays a key role in this.
In 2024, the Health research fund administered
by MB allocated 115.5 million
to HRC in 20 25, 26.
The budget is 1 0 7 0.6 million.
This change reflects fiscally neutral adjustments,
including transfers of funding
to support longitudinal studies
and independent research organization capability.
Importantly, this is not a reduction in overall
health research investment.
The funding continues to support health research priorities
through different mechanisms within the broader
science and innovation system.
Uh, for your note, uh, health, uh,
research council supported a a thousand contracts last year
involving nearly 5,000 researchers, 844,
currently practicing healthcare professionals
and 573 individuals, uh, in the sector.
HSC also funds researchers
with deep discipline expertise such as those applying AI
to improve effectiveness and efficiency
within healthcare ceilings.
From an impact perspective,
if we look back over the past three years,
HRC funded research has led
to over a hundred innovations in healthcare delivery,
120 instances where the science has directly changed
how we do health and health policy.
Over 30, improvements to clinical guidelines
and healthcare efficiencies In dollar terms.
HRC funded, uh, work, for example,
has delivered significant benefits.
Uh, if I look at the, uh, saline versus albumin, uh,
fluid evaluation study, fundamentally, uh,
challenging the previously held concept
that you could use albumin for volume replacement in ICUs
and, uh, through a combination of medical research, uh,
institute and through HRC funding
that was able to be put to rest.
Uh, and now across the world, it's not common
to be using albumin for volume replacement,
but what they found was for those
with traumatic brain injury, they actually did worse.
Why that matters is
because, uh, albumin is about $322 per liter as compared
to normal saline, which is about a dollar 50.
And so they were able to derive significant benefit rounding
out about 135 million just
to New Zealand alone in international impacts.
That's a good, good piece of work with real economic impact.
Um, the HRCs work also supports the broader goals
of the science system, fostering interdisciplinary
collaboration, public private partnerships,
and leverages our strength and data and research.
We are committed to ensuring that health research continues
to deliver value for the health system,
our economy, and all New Zealanders.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
You very much. Ruben
Davidson and then Steve. And then
Thank you, uh, chair
and thank you minister for being here today.
Um, I'm gonna jump straight to questions.
I'm conscious we have very little time. Mm-hmm.
Do you agree with the science system advisory group
and international evidence showing
that public investment in health research is one
of the most cost effective ways
to improve population health outcomes?
I think investment, uh, in science, innovation
and technology related endeavors, uh, are a way
to advance both social goals, environmental goals, uh,
are a way to advance health related goals
as well. So yes, I do believe
So. If, if you do
believe that,
then why has the government chosen in a growth budget
to cut the health research funds by 17 million in the 25 26?
Uh, so I've challenged those figures.
As I said in my opening remarks,
it's a 10 million deficit as I understand it.
And I'll ask Annette to talk to it further.
And as I also mentioned, it's not actually gone from health.
Uh, that 10 million went to two places.
One went to Mulgan Institute
as an independent research organization.
Uh, the other went to the strategic investment fund,
which was to prop up the two longitudinal studies,
the Dunedin and the Christchurch study.
Of course, they were not well suited
to being managed under the, uh, HRC,
so still in the health health domain.
So it's gone to make up for cuts in other places? No,
No. It's just better.
Those were already funded initiatives
What's that? Sorry? Those
Were already funded initiatives.
So if the money's been moved across to fund something
that was already funded, there would've had
to have been a cut in place for the need
to be, the money to be moved.
Um, no, the funding associated with the programs moved
with the programs to the strategic investment fund.
'cause they could be better managed from that.
They haven't left the health umbrella.
So, as, Uh, minister talking about longitudinal studies
and you've shifted money there, can you,
can you explain what's the risk if a longitudinal study
didn't have that, that money, um, associated with it?
Well, first of all, it's to acknowledge the work
that was done, uh, when it was with, um, with HRC,
but as, as it turned out, uh, more could be done.
And, uh, the ACT wasn't well suited,
too longitudinal studies, which sometimes some unfor need
actually looked like infrastructure, uh,
as, as it was put to me.
And so to maintain, um, the validity
and maintain the outcomes from those two really important
studies was thought best to move them
and funding to a different, uh, different agency.
Do you wanna talk further to that, Denise?
Uh, sure. Yeah. So, um, the Christchurch study,
in the Dunedin study,
the two longitudinal studies in questions.
So they were funded by the HRC.
The HRC ACT requires them to fund research projects.
But these, uh, studies are actually about data collection
and curation that supports a whole range
of other research activity.
So we've transferred those contracts
and the money associated with them into the Strategic
Science Investment Fund
and continue to invest in exactly the same activity.
And then health research projects funded through the hr,
so you can draw on those data sets
to undertake health related research.
So it's same investment just in different places.
I'll go back to,
So just a final question on that.
Do you accept that the Health research fund serves
as a pipeline into New Zealand's wider
health innovation system?
Uh, as a, as a doctor
and former Minister of health, do you not see
that in a growth budget, anything
but increases to funding is effectively
A cut in that space?
Uh, no. Uh, the budget is the same. It is unchanged.
As I said, of course, we'd like
to be putting funding into all parts, uh,
of the wider science system.
Uh, but certainly this particular, uh,
fund has not had any, had any reductions.
But you wouldn't, you wouldn't see it as a priority
for an increase in funding.
Well, I think there's priority across all of the science
umbrella, uh, if you like.
And this is just one of them.
And, and we weigh up where we could put new
money as we come to that.
So you don't see health as a priority.
Health is a priority, but actually,
but it hasn't been in this budget.
Yes, it is because there's no change from last year.
Uh, and you clearly see some of the objectives
that the Health Research Council has,
and it is still supported by this budget.
So yes, health is a priority,
but there are other priorities as well.
Steve, April, Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you, minister. Um, I'm gonna move on to the allocation
of funding for the new Genetech regular
and ask you a couple of questions regarding that.
Please. Um, do you accept the evidence of AG research that
Mr. Chair
Coexistence? I
have a point of order, um, scramble. Is this part of,
I'm just asking that question myself. I'm not sure that
Part of the, it's not, it's not part of the boat health
that is, um, another
You, Mr. Chair, you make the call, but
I understand that part of the, uh,
estimate funding includes the, the Genetech regulator.
It's not as part of The health,
not though not not through hr.
It's not part of the health, it's not part of folk health.
Can I just double check something Mr. Chair?
Mr. Mayor, Is there an opportunity to ask the minister
questions on the Genetech regulator in another forum? Uh,
Yes. Through the
science, innovation and technology. Right.
Thank you. We'll do that. Yeah.
Excellent. Okay.
Um, and following on from the gene technology, something
that is more related to health, health research, um,
what has changing our gene technology laws, um,
how's it going to unlock
health research here in New Zealand?
So the, um, health research funder has already, uh,
been supportive of institutes, for example,
the Magan Institute and will be aware of their sort
of CAR T cell, uh, in involvement.
Um, so HRC has already, uh, been involved with that.
And we're looking forward to opportunities
as we build a framework, um,
with which we can put gene technology, uh, on, uh, for
how else the Health Research Council, uh, suitable
to their mandate, uh, might be able to,
to place things on, on that framework.
So it's, it's requiring, uh,
legislative changes this committee will know at the moment.
And, uh, when that's done, um, I'm very enthusiastic, uh,
for what health re health research funding
might be able to do in this space.
Mm-hmm. Can, um, can supplementary Mr.
Chair, um, what, what does, what does current D cell mean
for, for New Zealanders?
Well, uh, you know, obviously cutting edge technology
that fundamentally is an example of precision medicine, um,
to attack cancers that are unique for you,
is fundamentally what this does.
Um, and by modifying T cells particularly, um,
basically are taking out a person's own T cells
or sort of an autologous transfusion, if you like.
Um, modifying in the direct room specifically
to the antigens on that tumor that's specific to
that person, and then placing the T cells back in the body,
uh, you are able to directly attack that cancer.
And importantly, and certainly what the evidence is, uh,
initially, uh, comparing
to other CAR T-cell environments across the world, we seem
to be able to be getting less side effects, uh,
through the work that, uh, Milligan's doing.
So, um, very, very exciting advances, um, which,
which we'd like, everyone would like to progress further
and faster, uh, through,
through places like GaN Institute. Thank you,
Jenny. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, minister.
Um, you mentioned in your opening remarks
around a hundred innovations
and we've just been talking about CAR T-cell here.
What else is there, other than that one
that will be game changers based on, um, the funding
that HRC gets?
Mm-hmm. Is there anything in particular you'd like
to highlight, committee that you're really excited about?
So, tragically I was excited
by the album volume replacement.
Actually, that kind of spins,
it kind kind of spins my wheels.
Uh, but, uh, there was other stuff they did, again,
ICU based and Mrs.
Uh, researchers out of CAP post, uh,
and Auckland again with the, uh, uh,
medical Research Institute and HRC funding.
And, uh, they did some work looking at the blood glucose
levels, uh, in ICU.
And the standard mantra had been,
you wanted really tight control.
Turns out you don't actually want that tight, you know,
a good example is what's called entropy with pulse.
Our, our pulse is not actually moment
by moment identical beat to beat.
There is entropy, there is a slight
millisecond or whatever, whatever.
So if you set, um, a respirate
or whatever to a certain, uh, certain rhythm, yes,
that's fine, you'll get a certain rhythm.
But actually human rhythm has a degree of entropy, a degree
of variation, and that's
what they found with blood boost as well.
Consequently, in ICUs now, blood glucose is not
as tightly monitored, monitored as it was,
and that's had significant economic impact if we wanted
to go, you know, to that, that outcome for
how long people are staying in ICU,
they've done really good work with stroke, risk measuring,
stroke, just a wide range of things.
I mean, what, what's top of your agenda?
Those, those things work for me.
If we wanted to raise up the flagpole
what HRC has done, what would you raise up
If it was me? I, um,
I think the, um, self-testing for HPV for, um,
women throughout New Zealand who live in rural communities
or in, in cultural backgrounds, that find going along
to the doctors to access, uh, testing, to be quite
confronting is a, a game changer in New Zealand. Thank you.
Jenny, can I follow on just very quickly?
How do we compare to, you know, other comparable, um, parts
of the world that we would sort of normally judge ourselves
by in this space?
Yeah, I, I'll ask Denise to speak that too,
but it's a question we raise, um, uh, with the, uh,
the chair of, of HRC, how do we know we're doing good work?
How do we know we're comparable?
And there's a number of measures that you can look at,
citations that come from, from the research,
economic impact, patents that might come from IT,
conferences that you are invited to.
So there's a range of of metrics.
And uh, when I last saw the meta presentation,
actually my takeaway from that was that we box
above our weight was my takeaway.
But Danette, do you wanna speak to that?
Yeah, it's particularly in biomedical research,
so Exactly right.
So building metric analysis shows in New Zealand in terms
of biomedical research, um, stands well
above the crowd internationally.
And we're really well routed.
That's why organizations like Milligan are able
to attract significant philanthropic funding and significant
and important international collaborations research.
So those, those are measures of success, um,
through the Thank you. Thank
You. Uh, no
of any more opposition questions.
Thank you, minister. We good? Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you.
That was the most interesting answers of the day. Thank.